the AO supported by the board, taking a broad and connected view across the
whole organisation.
Box A4.3A: Outline of the risk management cycle
1 The board defines the organisation's risk tolerance.
2 The organisation identifies and categorises its risks.
3 The organisation assesses the risks identified: how likely their possible impact,
identifying which are beyond tolerance and when.
4 The board scans the horizon for any remote overlooked risks.
5 The board decides which risks matter and what action should be taken, if any.
6 Downward delegation of management, coupled with upward reporting of risks through
the organisation enables the board to track performance
7 Using this feedback, the board takes a rounded overview, and may adjust decisions eg
on tolerance or on response.
8 Back to step 1 and iterate as the board chooses.
Identifying risks
A4.3.7 It is important to capture all the organisation's risks so that they can be
evaluated properly in context.
A4.3.8 There is value in getting each part of the organisation to think through its
own risks. At working level operational risks may loom large. It may only be at board
level that it is really possible to scan the horizon for emerging trends, problems or
opportunities that might change the organisations working environment. Some of
the critical risks that are easily overlooked are shown in box 4.38.
Box A4.3B: Examples of risk which are easily missed
+ Information security risks: unsecured digital information can be misplaced or copied.
* High impact low probability risks: remote risks with serious effect if they happen.
* Opportunity risks: where some choices may close off other alternatives;.
* End to end risks: which emerge when an operational chain fails simultaneously in
several places in a linked set of processes.
+ Inter-organisational risks; which can cause failure of the organisation's business because
of links to partners, suppliers and other stakeholders.
* Cumulative risks: which happen if several risks precipitate at once, eg in response to the
same trigger.
A4.3.9 As well as drawing on risk assessment from within the organisation, it may
be valuable to use an external source to make sure that nothing important has been
overlooked. Sometimes different public sector organisations can help each other out
in this way, to their mutual advantage. And it can be useful to get staff to work
together to consider the subject, eg in facilitated groups.
A4.3.10 Once the organisation's risks have been identified, it is possible to draw up
a risk register. This is a list of recognised risks which can be kept up to date and
which the board can review regularly. Each organisation needs to decide how to
82
