Annex 2.4

New services

A2.4.1 Chapter 2 (box 2.1) sets out the essential conditions for authorisation of public
spending. New services are exceptions, ie services for which parliament would
normally expect to provide authorising legislation but has not yet done so. They can
include altering the way in which an existing service is delivered as well as services
not previously delivered.

When the Supply and Appropriation Act suffices

A2.4.2 Notwithstanding the general rules ion box 2.1, in some circumstances it is
not necessary to have specific enabling legislation in place. Parliament accepts that
agreement to the Estimate! is sufficient authority for the kinds of expenditure listed
in boxes 2.5 or 2.6. The content of these boxes is reproduced in box A2.4A. They
can all be considered part of business as usual.

Box A2.4A: Expenditure parliament accepts may rest on a Supply and Appropriations Act

* routine administration costs: employment costs, rent, cleaning etc;

* lease agreements, eg for photocopiers;

«expenditure using prerogative powers, notably defence of the realm and international
treaty obligations;

«temporary services or continuing services of low cost, provided that there is no specific
legislation covering these matters before parliament and existing statutory restrictions are
respected, specifically

o initiatives lasting no more than two years, eg a pilot study or one off intervention; or

o expenditure of no more than £1.75m a year (amount adjusted from time to time).
A2.4.3 Itis important not to exceed these limits. The Treasury has agreed in the
Concordat (see annex 2.3) to seek to make sure they are respected. So departments
should consult the Treasury before relying upon them.
Anticipating a bill
A2.4.4 In addition, parliament is prepared to accept that departments may
undertake certain preparatory work while a bill is under consideration and before
royal assent. Examples are listed in box A2.48.
1 Which becomes a Supply and Appropriation Act once it has been through its parliamentary stages

68
