* the extent of each delegation, usually in financial terms, but potentially also in
qualitative terms, eg all items of a certain kind to require approval
+ any relevant authorities, eg the enabling legislation or letter from a Treasury minister
+ the relevant budget provision
* the relevant section of the department's Estimate
* any effective dates
+ arrangements for review. HMT requires that delegated authority limits be reviewed
annually.
A2.2.11 In turn departments should agree delegated authorities with their arm's
length bodies, making use of the template delegated authority letter. Delegations to
ALBs should be no greater than departments’ own delegated authorities.
Departments must seek HMT approval for the delegated authorities they agree with
their ALBs.
A2.2.12 There are some areas of expenditure and resource commitments which the
Treasury cannot delegate: see box A.2.2C.
Box A2.2C: where authority is never delegated
«items which are novel, contentious or repercussive, even if within delegated limits
* items which could exceed the agreed budget and Estimate limits
* contractual commitments to significant spending in future years for which plans have
not been set
* items requiring primary legislation (eg to write off NLF debt or PDC)
* any item which could set a potentially expensive precedent
* where Treasury consent is a specific requirement of legislation
A2.2.13 Strictly, the Treasury cannot delegate its power of approval where there is a
statutory requirement for Treasury approval. But in practice it can be acceptable to
set detailed and objective criteria where Treasury approval can be deemed without
specific examination of each case. This may be appropriate to avoid a great deal of
detailed case-by-case assessment. The Treasury may ask for intermittent sampling to
check that this arrangement is operating satisfactorily.
Failure to obtain Treasury authority
A2.2.14 All expenditure which falls outside a department's delegated authority and
has not been approved by the Treasury, is irregular. It cannot be charged to
departmental Estimates. Similarly, any resources committed or expenditure incurred
in breach of a condition attached to Treasury approval is irregular.
A2.2.15 Where resource consumption or expenditure is irregular, the Treasury may
be prepared to give retrospective approval if it is satisfied that:
e itwould have granted approval had it been approached properly in the
first place; and
e the department is taking steps to ensure that there is no recurrence.
64
