«make all its decisions in line with the strategy, aims and objectives of the
organisation set by ministers and/or in legislation
eo take a balanced view of the organisation's approach to managing
opportunity and risk
e impose no more than proportionate and defensible burdens on business;
financial management
e use its resources efficiently, economically and effectively, avoiding waste
and extravagance
e plan to use its resources on an affordable and sustainable path, within
agreed limits
e carry out procurement and project appraisal objectively and fairly, using
cost benefit analysis and generally seeking good value for the Exchequer as
a whole
use management information systems to gain assurance about value for
money and the quality of delivery and so make timely adjustments
avoid over defining detail and imposing undue compliance costs, either
internally or on its customers and stakeholders
have practical documented arrangements for controlling or working in
partnership with other organisations, as appropriate
e use internal and external audit to improve its internal controls and
performance.
3.3.1. Itisimportant that each accounting officer takes personal responsibility for
ensuring that the organisation they manage delivers the standards in box 3.1. In
particular, the accounting officer must personally sign: the accounts; the annual
report the governance statement (see annex 3.1); and having been satisfied that
they have been properly prepared to reflect the business of the organisation, must
personally approve: voted budget limits; and the associated Estimates
Memorandum.
3.3.2. The accounting officer of a corporate arm's length body should arrange for a
board member to sign the accounts as well as signing them himself or herself, if
(unusually) they are not a member of the board.
3.3.3. There are several other areas where accounting officers should take personal
responsibility.

* Regularity and propriety (see box 2.4), including securing Treasury
approval for any expenditure outside the normal delegations or outside
the subheads of Estimates.

o Affordability and sustainability: respecting agreed budgets and avoiding
unaffordable longer term commitments, taking a proportionate view
about other demands for resources.

1“
