5.3.3 Before the summer recess, the provision sought in the Estimate is formally
authorised in a Supply and Appropriation Act, which sets net expenditure limits for
the year. The Act is then the legal authority for public expenditure within the ambit
of the Estimate. The ambit itemises a specific range of permitted activities and
income streams for the year.
5.3.4 Within a financial year, there is some scope for transferring (through virement)
provision from one section or subhead to another within any of the control limits in
the same Estimate. There is scope for adjusting Estimate provision through a
Supplementary Estimate late in the year if circumstances change. A Supplementary
Estimate should show all movements between sections, even if they would
otherwise have been dealt with through virement.
5.3.5 Departmental Select Committees may examine departmental witnesses on the
plans contained in Estimates. Usually such hearings take place after Estimates are
laid in parliament but before they are voted into law.
5.3.6 If there is underspending against Estimate provision in one year, it cannot
automatically be carried forward to a later year. If a department wants to spend
resources it did not consume in a previous year, it needs Treasury approval and must
also obtain fresh parliamentary authority to spend in the year(s) concerned.
5.3.7 Like budgets, Estimates are set net of income. But parliament needs to be
made aware of receipts since Estimates authorise gross expenditure, normally using
statutory powers. Annex 5.3 explains more about of types of receipt. Chapter 6
contains guidance about setting and adjusting fees and charges.
5.3.8 Occasionally an Estimate sets a negative limit for permitted resources. This
happens if income is expected to exceed the relevant gross expenditure. Similarly a
Supplementary Estimate can be negative if provision for spending is to fall within a
given year.
5.3.9 A department's Estimate for a year includes all spending within its agreed
budget for that year, as well as any voted non-budget spending. Not all of this
amount requires voted parliamentary approval since some items, such as
Consolidated Fund Standing Services, are paid direct from the Consolidated Fund.
Hence only the voted parts of the Estimate requiring parliamentary approval appear
in the Supply and Appropriation Act. Of course the disciplines on public funds (box
3.1) apply to all the activities described in the Estimate and accounts whether within
the Act or not.
5.4 Excess Votes
5.4.1 Accounting officers have an important role in overseeing the integrity of the
Estimates for which they are responsible. In particular, accounting officers are
responsible for ensuring that Estimates are in good order (see section 2.2).
5.4.2 The Treasury presents parliament each year with a Statement of Excesses to
request retrospective authority for any unauthorised resources consumed above the
relevant limits or outside the ambit of the Estimate. Parliament takes these excesses
seriously. The PAC or departmental select committee may call witnesses to account
in person or ask for a written explanation.
5.4.3 The Statement of Excesses includes two kinds of excess:

34
