Accounting Officers
This chapter sets out the personal responsibilities of all accounting officers in
central government. Essentially accounting officers must be able to assure
parliament and the public of high standards of probity in the management of
public funds. This chapter is drawn to the attention of all accounting officers
when they are appointed.
3.1.1. Each organisation in central government — department, agency, trading
fund, NHS body, NDPB or arm's length body — must have an accounting officer. This
person is usually its senior official. The accounting officer in an organisation should
be supported by a board structured in line with the Corporate Governance Code.
3.1.2. Formally the accounting officer in a public sector organisation is the person
who parliament calls to account for stewardship of its resources. The standards the
accounting officer is expected to deliver are summarised in box 3.1. The equivalent
senior business managers of other public sector organisations are expected to deliver
equivalent standards.
3.2 Appointment of accounting officers
3.2.1. The Treasury appoints the permanent head of each central government
department to be its accounting officer. Where there are several accounting officers
in a department, the permanent head is the principal accounting officer.
3.2.2. Within departments, the Treasury also appoints the chief executive of each
trading fund as its accounting officer.
3.2.3. In turn the principal accounting officer of each department normally
appoints the permanent heads:
«of its executive agencies, as agency accounting officers for their agencies;
and
oof other ALBs (including all NDPBs), as accounting officers for these
bodies; and
. at their discretion, additional accounting officers for defined part(s) of the
department's business.
3.2.4. In the case of appointment of principal accounting officers of departments
and accounting officers of trading funds, the relevant department should send a
draft letter of appointment directly to the Treasury Office of Accounts team via
12
