1.5 Departments

1.5.1 Within the standards expected by parliament, and subject to the overall
control and direction of their ministers, departments have considerable freedom
about how they organise, direct and manage the resources at their disposal. It is for
the accounting officer in each department, acting within ministers’ instructions, and
supported by their boards, to control and account for the department's business.
1.5.2 A departmental board, chaired by the senior minister, leads each department.
Boards can bring to bear skills and experiences from elsewhere in, and outside of,
the public sector (see section 4.1).

1.5.3 Within each department, there should be adequate delegations, controls and
reporting arrangements to provide assurance to the board, the accounting officers
and ultimately ministers about what is being achieved, to what standards and with
what effect. These arrangements should provide timely and prompt management
information to enable plans to be adjusted as necessary. Similarly ministers should
have enough evidence about the impact of their policies to decide whether to
continue, modify or end them. This is discussed further in chapter 4.

1.5.4 In supporting ministers, civil servants should provide politically impartial
advice. Should they be asked to carry out duties which appear incompatible with
this obligation, the accounting officer should take the matter up with the minister
concerned (see also the Civil Service Code?).

1.5.5 Departments often operate with and through a variety of partners to deliver
their ministers’ policies. It is important that these relationships operate in the public
interest: see chapter 7.

1.6 The Comptroller and Auditor General

1.6.1 Supported by the National Audit Office (NAO), the Comptroller and Auditor
General (C&AG) operates independently to help parliament scrutinise how public
funds have been used in practice. Further information about the role of the NAO is
available on their websites and in annex 1.1.

1.6.2 The C&AG provides parliament with two sorts of audit:

+ financial audit of the accounts of departments and ALBs, covering:

— assurance that accounts have been properly prepared and are free
of material misstatements?; and

— confirmation that the underlying transactions have appropriate
parliamentary authority;

«value for money reports assessing the economy, efficiency and
effectiveness with which public money has been deployed in selected
areas of public business. A programme of these reviews covers a variety

6 If there is a change of Accounting Officer in the course of the year, the Accounting Officer in place at the year end takes
responsibilty for the whole year's accounts, using assurances as necessary.
7 hittp:/www,chisenice gov uk/aboutivalues
8 The NAO website address is http:/www.nzo.org. uk
9 See Audit Practice Note 10 of the Audit Practices Board on the FRC website at Hitp:/www. frc.org.uk
5
