Annex 4.4
Central government organisations should not generally take out commercial insurance because it is
better value for money for the taxpayer to cover its own risks. However, there are some circumstances
where commercial insurance is appropriate. This annex sets out the issues to be considered. This
guidance applies to departments and their arms-length bodies.
A4.4.1 Central government organisations should not normally buy commercial insurance to
protect against risk. Since the government can pool and spread its own risks, there is
little need to pay the private sector to provide this service. In general it is cheaper for
the government to cover its own risks.
A4.4.2 However, in certain circumstances, as part of forming a risk management
strategy, the accounting officer in a public sector organisation may choose to
purchase commercial insurance to protect certain parts of the organisation's
portfolio. Such decisions should always be made after a cost benefit analysis in order
to secure value for money for the Exchequer as a whole. Some acceptable reasons
for using insurance are set out in box A4.4A.

Box A4.4A: Where commercial insurance may provide value for money

* Building insurance as a condition of the lease and where the lessor will not accept an
indemnity: commercial insurance may be taken out where the cost of accommodation,
together with the cost of insurance, is more cost effective than other accommodation
options.

* Overall site insurance: private sector contractors and developers usually take out a
single-site insurance policy because it is cheaper than each individual party insuring
themselves separately. So a client organisation may be able to cover its risks at little or
no extra cost.

* Insurance of boilers and lifts: which may be a condition of taking out a lease, and
typically involves periodic expert inspection designed to reduce the risk of loss or
damage.

* Commercial initiatives: because these activities are outside the government's core
responsibilities, losses on a department's discretionary commercial activities could
reduce resources available for its core activities (see chapter 7). It will usually therefore
make sense to insure them. Any goods used for services sold to other parts of central
government should not, however, be insured.

* Where commercial insurance is integral to a project: eg, where private contractors insist,
it may be appropriate to purchase insurance even if the net benefit is negative. But this
may be a sign that the project needs restructuring to avoid any requirement to buy

86
