4.6 Receipts
4.6.1 Public sector organisations should have arrangements for identifying,
collecting and recording all amounts due to them promptly and in full. Outstanding
amounts should be followed up diligently. Key features of internal systems of
control are suggested in box 4.5.
4.6.2 Public sector organisations should take care to track and enforce debts
promptly. The presumption should be in favour of recovery unless it is uneconomic
to do so.
Box 4.5: essential features of systems for collecting sums due
* Adequate records to enable claims to be made and pursued in full.
* Routines to prevent unauthorised deletions and amendments to claims.
+ Credit management systems to manage and pursue amounts outstanding.
+ Controls to prevent diversion of funds and other frauds.
* Clear lines of responsibility for making decisions about pressing claims increasingly more
firmly, and for deciding on any abatement or abandonment of claims which may be
merited.
+ Arrangements for deciding upon and reporting any write-offs (see annex 4.10). Audit
trails which can readily be checked and reported upon both internally and externally.
4.7 Non-standard financial transactions
4.7.1 From time to time public sector organisations may find it makes sense to carry
out transactions outside the usual planned range, eg:

«write-offs of unrecoverable debts or overpayments;

«recognising losses of stocks or other assets;

+ long term loans or gifts of assets.
4.7.2 In each case it is important to deal with the issue in the public interest, with
due regard for probity and value for money. Annexes 4.10 to 4.12 set out what is
expected when such transactions take place in central government, including
notifying parliament.
4.7.3 Where an organisation discovers an underpayment, the deficit should be
made good as soon as is practicable and in full. If there has been a lapse of time, for
example caused by legal action to establish the correct position, it may be
appropriate to consider paying interest, depending on the nature of the
commitment to the payee and taking into account the reputation of the
organisation and value for money for the Exchequer as a whole (see also section
4.11).
4.7.4 Similarly, public sector organisations may have reason to carry out current
transactions which would not normally be planned for. These might be:

* extra contractual payments to service providers;

27
