A2.4.9 Departments which do not use paving bills may want to make an early start
on legislation contained in a bill during its passage through parliament. Usually the
spending in question lacks both adequate statutory underpinning and authorisation
in Estimates.
A2.4.10 In these circumstances there is a risk that allowing the spending to proceed
might be wasteful if royal assent is not achieve as expected. So it is good practice to
try to find other ways of making progress with the policy without anticipating royal
assent.
A2.4.11 If, nevertheless. a department wants to spend early on matters to be
empowered by a bill before parliament, it may make a claim for an advance from
the Contingencies Fund with a plan to repay it out of the next Estimate when
agreeds. The spending must meet the conditions in box A2.4D.
Box A2.4D: Criteria for drawings on the Contingencies Fund
+ the bill in question must have reached second reading in the Commons; and
«the bill must be virtually certain to achieve royal assent with minimal change, preferably
within a year; and
* genuine urgency in the public interest, ie where postponing expenditure until after royal
assent would:
* cause additional wasteful expenditure or
* lose (not just defer) efficiency savings; or
* cause other damage or public detriment.
A2.4.12 The Treasury judges applications for access to the Contingencies Fund
cautiously and on their merits. It is important to note that neither political
imperative nor ministerial preference is relevant to making this assessment.
A2.4.13 In rare circumstances a Contingencies Fund advance may be awarded to
make senior appointments to a new public sector body being set up under a bill.
When this is allowed, the people appointed must be clear that if for any reason the
legislation fails, the provisional appointments would have to be cancelled.
Notifying parliament
A2.4.14 The instances described in this annex all mean that parliament has less
control over certain items of public expenditure than it would normally expect.
Departments should therefore take great care to keep parliament informed of what
is happening and why.
A2.4.15 A timely written ministerial statement giving the amounts involved and
their timing is the essential minimum before Contingencies Fund resources can be
released. If possible an oral explanation at second reading, or a separate oral
statement, is desirable. In addition there should be:
«notes in the explanatory memorandum and impact assessment to the
relevant bill; and
3 See section 5.8 of he Estimates Manual
70
