Assessing vulnerability to fraud

A4.9.4 Each organisation should identify and assess at different levels how it might
be vulnerable to fraud with reference to the HMG standards for Fraud Risk
Assessment. Fraud should be always considered as a risk for the departments’ risk
register.

Evaluating the scale of fraud risk

A4.9.5 For any new major area of spend, departments shall assess the risk of and
impact from fraud at the outset when the spending is being proposed. This should
identify the potential for fraud and the different impacts that fraud could have for
this spend area. Once spending is approved this should result in the development
and continued maintenance of a detailed fraud risk assessment

Responding to fraud risk

A4.9.6 The organisations response to fraud risk should be customised to the risks
it faces. Typically it will involve some or all of the following.

«Developing a Fraud Policy Statement, a Fraud Risk Strategy and a Fraud
Response Plan (key documents that every organisation should have).

+ Developing and promoting an anti-fraud culture, maybe through a
clear statement of commitment to ethical behaviour to promote
awareness of fraud. Recruitment screening, training and maintaining
good staff morale can also be important.

«Allocating responsibilities for the overall and specific management of
fraud risk so that these processes are integrated into management.

+ Establishing cost-effective internal systems of control to prevent and
detect fraud.

+ Developing the skills and expertise to manage fraud risk effectively and
to respond to fraud effectively when it arises.

+ Establishing well publicised avenues for staff and members of the
public to report suspicions of fraud.

«Responding quickly and effectively to fraud when it arises.

+ Establishing systems for investigations into allegations of fraud.

+ Using the government's Counter Fraud Function and/or Internal Audit
to advise on fraud risk and drawing on their experience to strengthen
control.

«Taking appropriate action (criminal, disciplinary) against fraudsters and
seeking to recover losses.

«Continuously evaluating the effectiveness of anti-fraud measures in
reducing fraud.

«Working with stakeholders to tackle fraud through intelligence sharing,
joint investigations, etc.

103
