stewardship of public resources in ways appropriate to their duties and context and
conducive to efficiency.

1.2 Ministers

1.2.1 In the absence of a written constitution, the powers used to deploy public
resources are a blend of common law, primary and secondary legislation,
parliamentary procedure, the duties of ministers, and other long-standing practices.
This mix may of course change from time to time.

1.2.2 As the Corporate Governance Code makes clear, the minister in charge of a
department is responsible for its policy and business as part of the broad sweep of
government policy determined in Cabinet. They:

+ determines the policies of the departmental group;

«chairs the departmental board;

«allocates responsibilities among the ministers in the department;

«chooses which areas of business to delegate to officials, and on what
conditions;

+ looks to the department's accounting officer (see chapter 3) to delegate
within the department to deliver the minister's decisions and to support
the minister in making policy decisions and handling public funds; and

+ also has general oversight of other bodies on whose behalf they may
answer in parliament, including the department's arms length bodies
(ALBs).

1.2.3 The Ministerial Code? requires ministers to heed the advice of their accounting
officers about the proper conduct of public business. See section 3.4 for how the
minister may direct the accounting officer to proceed with a policy if a point of this
kind cannot be resolved.
1.2.4 The minister in charge of a department may delegate defined areas of its
business, or of its parliamentary work, to their junior ministers. Ministers have wide
powers to make policies and to instruct officials.
1.2.5 Only ministers can propose legislation to parliament to raise public revenue
through taxation, or to use public funds to pursue their policy objectives. Specific
primary legislation is normally required to spend public funds (see section 2.1).
Similarly, taxes may be collected, and public funds may be drawn, only with
parliamentary authority; and only as parliament has authorised.
1.2.6 It is not normally acceptable for a private sector organisation to be granted
powers to raise taxes, nor to distribute their proceeds. Parliament expects these
responsibilities to fall to ministers, using public sector organisations.
1.2.7 The House of Commons (and not the House of Lords) enjoys the financial
privilege to make decisions on these matters.
2 https//www.gov.uk/government/publications/ministerial-code

3
