Box A2.4B: expenditure that can be incurred before royal assent

«pilot studies informing the choice of the policy option (because this process is part of
designing, modifying or even deciding to abandon the policy);

* scoping studies designed to identify in detail the implications of a proposal in terms of
staff numbers, accommodation costs and other expenditure to inform the legislative
process;

* in-house project teams and/or project management boards;

* use of private sector consultants to help identify the chosen policy option, assist with
scoping studies or other work informing the legislative process;

+ work on the legislative process associated with the new service.

A2.4.5 Departments may be able to finance activities such as those in box A2.4B out
of their existing resources. When this happens, departments should make sure that
the ambit2 of the relevant Estimate covers the planned expenditure.

A2.4.6 Its also important to understand in which areas of new business parliament
does expect the normal rigour for authorisation (box 2.1) to apply. For the
avoidance of doubt, some examples are shown in box A2.4C.

Box A2.4C: expenditure which may not normally incurred before royal assent

«significant work associated with preparing for or implementing the new task enabled by
a bill, eg renting offices hiring expert consultants or designing or purchasing significant
IT equipment;

+ recruitment of chief executives and board members of a new public sector organisation;

* recruitment of staff for a new public sector organisation.

Providing for a new service
A2.4.7 Some new services go well beyond the examples in box A2.4B. They include
such things as paying a new grant, providing a new registration service,
transforming the delivery of existing service or setting up a new public sector
organisation. Even if a bill providing for a new service is before parliament, the
activity the bill provides for cannot normally go ahead before royal assent. It is
therefore good practice to plan the timetable for achieving the new service so that it
is compatible with the bill timetable.
A2.4.8 Sometimes it is convenient to use a paving bill to provide the necessary
powers to get a new service under way quickly. A paving bill can provide powers to
allow expenditure which would be nugatory if the subsequent detailed legislation
for the new service does not proceed, eg employing consultants to design a
significant IT or regulatory system. Paving bills are usually short, though they may be
contentious (and time consuming) as they can prompt parliamentary discussion of
the underlying substance of the measure.
2 See paragraph 3.9 of the Estimates’ Manual

69
