Delegation

A2.2.5 Formally, Treasury consent is required for all expenditure or resource
commitments. In practice, the Treasury delegates to departments’ authority to enter
into commitments and to spend within predefined limits without specific prior
approval from the Treasury (but see A.2.2.12 for exceptions). Delegated authorities
may also allow departments to enter into commitments to spend (eg contingent
liabilities) and to deal with special transactions (such as some write-offs) without
prior approval.

A2.2.6 Such delegated authorities strike a balance between the Treasury's need for
control in order to fulfil its responsibilities to Parliament and the department's
freedom to manage within its agreed budget limits and Parliamentary provision.
A2.2.7 Departments should not take general Treasury approval of an Estimate as
approval for specific proposals outside delegated limits even if provision for them is
included in the Estimate.

A2.2.8 The Treasury may also work through the Cabinet Office to set certain
expenditure controls applicable across central government.

Setting delegated authorities

A2.2.9 While the standard terms for inclusion in delegated authorities are set out in
box A2.2B, HMT has produced a single template delegation letter which must be
used to set delegated limits for central government departments and ALBs.
Departments should appreciate that delegated authorities for certain kinds of
expenditure can be modified or removed entirely if the Treasury is not satisfied that
the department is using them responsibly.

A2.2.10 In establishing delegated authorities, the Treasury will:

e agree with the department how it will take spending decisions (e.g.
criteria and/or techniques for investment appraisal, project
management and later evaluation);

e establish a mechanism for checking the quality of the department's
decision-taking (e.g. by reviewing cases above a specified limit, or
giving full delegation but requiring a schedule of completed cases of
which a sample may be examined subsequently); and

e encourage delegation of authority within the department to promote
effective financial management. In general, authority should be
delegated to the point where decisions can be taken most efficiently. It
is for the accounting officer to determine how authority should be
delegated to individual managers.

Box A2.28B: standard terms for delegated authorities
*  adlear description of each item delegated
1 hitos:/www. gov uklgovernment/collections/cabinet-office-controls
63
