A5.4.10 PFI contracts are a special case of procurement and so can cause
departments to take on liabilities. There is no need to notify use of standard PFI
terms to parliament, but any use of non-standard terms should be reported like any
other.
A5.4.11 There are additional conditions for taking on non-standard conditions,
namely:

+ the need must be urgent and unlikely to be repeated; and

+ itwould be in the national interest to act even though there is no

statutory authority.
Taking on liabilities
A5.4.12 Before accepting any liability, the organisation should appraise the proposal
using the Green Book!, to secure value for money, just like a proposal to undertake
any other project. The liability should be designed to restrict exposure to the
minimum, eg by imposing conditions about duration.
A5.4.13 Many liabilities transfer risk from the private sector to the public sector. The starting
basis in these cases should be that a risk-based fee is charged to the private sector
(analogous to a guarantee fee or insurance premium). Charging fees in this way
ensures the private sector has an incentive to mitigate risk and reduces taxpayers’ exposure
to liabilities crystallising.
A.5.4.14 It will not always be possible or desirable to charge the private sector a fee.
For example, if the department does not have the legal power to do so, or because the
policy intervention is counter-cyclical. In these cases, the Treasury will need to be
satisfied why not charging a fee is appropriate.
A.5.4.15 The Contingent Liability Approval Framework"! provides detailed advice on
charging for risk, mitigations to consider during the design of new guarantees and
indemnities, and the contact details of expertise available in government to advise
on such proposals.
A5.4.16 Providing indemnities to contractors or limiting their liability in the event
of their own negligence, or that of a sub-contractor, should only be undertaken
following an assessment of the best value for money option for the exchequer as a
whole. Assessment of VFM should include consideration of the fact that requiring
excessive liability caps, beyond what would be reasonable given the size and scope
of the contract, is likely to result in potential contractors including pricing for
excessive risk or choosing not to bid, thus reducing competition. The extreme case
of unlimited liability should be used very sparingly and only after discussion with the
Commercial Function.
A5.4.17 When considering the use of unlimited liability clauses departments should
consider whether the contractor could bear such losses without being rendered
insolvent, resulting in the risk being passed back to the department. The
Outsourcing Playbook gives further advice on identifying when to use liability caps
and how to set the level of those caps and support should be sought from the
Commercial Function. Where the quantum or scope of the cap is a departure from
normal commercial practice, or will give rise to a contingent liability, Treasury
consent should be sought in the usual way for novel contentious and repercussive
spend. For the avoidance of doubt limitations of liability that are prohibited or
145
1 contingent Liability Approval Framework.
