This can mean that different organisations take different approaches to the same
opportunities or risks.

4.3.2 There should be a regular discipline of reappraising the opportunities and risks
facing the organisation since both alter with time and circumstances, as indeed may
the chosen responses. This process should avoid excessive caution, since it can be as
damaging as unsuitable risk taking. The assessment should normally include:

+ maintaining a risk register, covering identified risks and contingent risks
from horizon scanning;

«reputational risks, since poor performance could undermine the
credibility, and ultimately the creditworthiness, of the Exchequer as a
whole;

+ consideration of the dangers of maintaining the status quo;

«plans for disaster recovery;

+ appraisal of end to end risks in critical processes and other significant
activities.

4.3.3 In making decisions about how to manage and control opportunity and risk,
audit evidence and other assurance processes can usefully inform choice. Audit,
including internal audit, can provide specific, objective and well-informed assurance
and insight to help an organisation evaluate its effectiveness in achieving its
objectives. It is good practice for the audit committee to advise the governing board
of a public sector organisation on its key decisions on governance and managing
opportunities and risks. It is also a good discipline for this process to include
evaluating progress in implementing PAC recommendations, where they have been
accepted.
4.3.4 In turn the board should support the accounting officer in drawing up the
governance statement, which forms part of each organisation's annual accounts.
See annex 3.1. Further guidance about managing risks is in annex 4.3 and the
Orange Book.
4.4 Insurance
4.4.1 In the private sector risk is often managed by taking out insurance. In central
government it is generally not good value for money to do so. This is because the
public sector has a wide and diverse asset portfolio; a reliable income through its
ability to raise revenue through taxation; and access to borrowed funds more
cheaply than any in the private sector. In addition commercial providers of insurance
also have to meet their own costs and profit margins. Hence the public purse is
uniquely able to finance restitution of damaged assets or deal with other risks, even
very large ones. If the government insured risk, public services would cost more.
4.4.2 However, there are some limited circumstances in which it is appropriate for
public sector organisations to insure. They include legal obligationss, and occasions
6 Eg ALBs should insure vehicles where the Road Traffic Act requires it

25
