Public sector organisations should have good quality internal governance and sound financial
management. Appropriate delegation of responsibilities and effective mechanisms for internal
reporting should ensure that performance can be kept on track. Good practice should be followed in
procuring and managing resources and assets; hiring and managing staff; and deterring waste, fraud
and other malpractice. Central government departments have some specific responsibilities for
reporting, including to parliament.
4.1.1 Each public sector organisation should establish governance arrangements
appropriate to its business, scale and culture. The structure should combine efficient
decision making with accountability and transparency.
4.1.2 In doing so, central government departments should be guided by the
Corporate Governance Code3. Each public sector organisation needs clear
leadership, normally provided by a board. Box 4.1 sets out best practice for
departmental boards.
Box 4.1: best practice for boards in central government departments
* chaired by the department's most senior minister, with junior ministers as members
* comparable numbers of official and non-executive members, including a lead non-
executive and a professionally qualified finance director (see annex 4.1)
* meeting at least quarterly
* sets the department's strategy to implement ministers’ policy decisions
* leads the department's business and determines its culture
+ ensures good management of the department's resources — financial, assets, people
* decides risk appetite and monitors emerging threats and opportunities
«steers performance to keep it on track using regularly updated information about
progress
* keeps an overview of its ALBs" activities
4.1.3 Itis good practice for ALBs to use similar principles. In many ALBs some
structural features, such as board composition, derive from statute but considerable
discretion may remain. In some organisations it is usual, or found valuable, for the
board to include members with designated responsibility or expertise, eg for
regional affairs or for specialist professional skills.
4.1.4 In order to carry out its responsibilities each board needs to decide, and
document, how it will operate. Box 4.2 outlines the key decisions. It is not
3 hitos:/www gov.ukigovermentpublications/corporate-governance-code-for-central-government departmentsfor both the
code and the good practice guidance
22
