2.2 Using the Estimate
2.2.1 The requirements in box 2.1 are to some extent interrelated. The accounting
officer of a department (see also chapter 3) is responsible for ensuring that:
2.2.2 the Estimate(s) presented to parliament for the department's annual
expenditure (consolidating its ALBs) are within the statutory powers and within the
government's expenditure plans; and
2.2.3 use of resources is within the ambit of the vote and consistent with the
Estimate(s)-
and must answer to parliament for stewardship of these responsibilities.
2.3 Treasury consents
2.3.1 Departments also need Treasury consent before undertaking expenditure or
making commitments which could lead to expenditure (see annex 2.1). Usually the
Treasury agrees some general approvals for each department subject to delegated
limits and/or exclusions.
2.3.2 Some common approaches to setting delegations are shown in box 2.2 and
are discussed further in annex 2.2. It is good practice to review delegations from
time to time to make sure that they remain up to date and appropriate. Delegations
can be tightened or loosened at reviews, depending on experience.

Box 2.2: examples of approaches to delegated authorities

* objective criteria for exceptions requiring specific Treasury scrutiny or approval

* a sampling mechanism to allow specimen cases to be examined

* a lower limit above which certain kinds of projects must achieve specific consent
2.3.3 In turn departments should agree with each of their arm's length bodies (ALBs
- the public sector organisations they sponsor or finance) a similar set of delegations
appropriate to their business? (see also chapter 7).
2.3.4 There is an important category of expenditure commitments for which the
Treasury cannot delegate responsibility. It is transactions which set precedents, are
novel, contentious or could cause repercussions elsewhere in the public sector. Box
2.3 gives examples. Treasury consent to such transactions should always be
obtained before proceeding, even if the amounts in question lie within the
delegated limits.
2 Delegations to ALBs should never be greater than the delegated limits agreed between the Treasury and the sponsor department.

8
