Endowments
A5.1.13 Grants and grants in aid are normally paid to meet the needs of the
recipients. Exceptionally, there may be a case for funding by way of endowment or
dowry, ie a modest one-off grant to enable the recipient to set up a fund from
which to draw down over several years. The recipient should then be able to make a
clean break with the need for support.
A5.1.14 A5.1.14 Departments contemplating such funding arrangements should
consult the relevant Treasury spending team (and in turn arm's length bodies should
consult their sponsor departments) as this form of funding is always novel and
contentious. The Treasury will need to consider the value for money case for this
form of funding, including:
othe opportunity cost of locking public funds into a particular endowment,
using investment appraisal techniques;
othe value of the particular programme or project against others. The
Treasury will need to be satisfied that such funding would not protect any
low-value projects or programmes from proper expenditure scrutiny;
othe sustainability of the funded body and whether such funding will remove
future reliance on public funding;
e whether there are clear objectives, outputs and outcomes of the funding;
and
e the risk of further call on public funds.
A5.1.15 Any such endowment should:
eo reflect genuine need for capital funding that could not be raised through
other methods;
* be made only to recipients with the competence to manage the endowment
over time; and
«avoid skewing public funding away from other projects that have genuine
cash needs.
AS5.1.16 The terms of an endowment should:
e be clear that the funded body should not subsequently approach the donor
for annual funding;
e maintain clear boundaries between the funder and recipient.
A5.1.17 Endowments should never be used as a way of bringing expenditure
forward to avoid an underspend. Nor is it acceptable to make a string of
endowment payments to a single recipient instead of taking specific provision in
legislation to pay grants.
AS5.1.18 Endowments are intended for situations where a clear financial break will
be advantageous to both recipient and donor. Normally the recipient will be a civil
society body or equivalent status.
136
