3.7.9. The PAC expects the government to respond promptly and transparently
through both the initial Treasury Minute and subsequent Progress Reports.
Accounting officers should ensure the internal clearance processes within their
organisation are arranged to fit with deadlines for responses.
3.7.10. In addition, if a department determines it is necessary to revise the target
date for implementing an agreed recommendation, the accounting officer should
write immediately to the PAC, copied to the Treasury Officer of Accounts, and
provide a detailed explanation for the deferral. Departments should not leave
notification of the delay in implementation until the publication of the next Treasury
Minutes Progress Report.
3.8 When the accounting officer is not available
3.8.1. Each public sector organisation must have an accounting officer available for
advice or decision as necessary at short notice. When the accounting officer is
absent and cannot readily be contacted, another senior official should deputise.
3.8.2. If asignificant absence is planned, the principal accounting officer may invite
the Treasury to appoint a temporary acting accounting officer.
3.8.3. In these circumstances, a temporary acting accounting officer stands in the
shoes of the principal accounting officer. They are not acting on behalf of the
Principal Accounting Officer but are personally responsible to Parliament in their
own right. Their decisions are not subject to ratification by the principal accounting
officer and their role should only be activated if the principal accounting officer is
unable to fulfil their obligations. To all intents and purposes the temporary acting
accounting officer replaces the principal accounting officer.
3.8.4. Asimilar logic can also apply for an accounting officer in an arm's length
body (ALB), whereby the arrangement must be agreed and formalised between the
department and the ALB.
3.9 Conflicts of interest
3.9.1. Sometimes an accounting officer faces an actual or potential conflict of
interest. There must be no doubt that the accounting officer meets the standards
described in box 3.1 without divided loyalties. Possible ways of managing this issue
include:
efor a minor conflict, declaring the conflict and arranging for someone
other than the accounting officer to make a decision on the issue(s) in
question
+ for a significant but temporary conflict, inviting the Treasury (or the
sponsor department, as the case may be) to appoint an interim
accounting officer for the period of the conflict of interest
«for serious and lasting conflicts, resignation.
3.10 Arm's length bodies
3.10.1. The responsibilities of accounting officers in departments and in arm's
length bodies (ALB) are essentially similar. Accounting officers in ALBs must also
19
