6.2.2 This approach is simply intended to make sure that the government neither
profits at the expense of consumers nor makes a loss for taxpayers to subsidise. It
requires honesty about the policy objectives and rigorous transparency in the public
interest.
6.2.3 As elsewhere, organisations supplying public services should always seek to
control their costs so that public money is used efficiently and effectively. The impact
of lower costs should normally be passed on to consumers in lower charges. Success
in reducing costs is no excuse for avoiding the principles in this guidance.
6.2.4 This chapter applies to all fees and charges set by ministers and by an
extensive range of public bodies: departments, trading funds, NDPBs, the NHS, non-
devolved services in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and most public
corporations. Departments should be able to satisfy themselves that their ALBs can
deliver the financial objectives for the services they charge for. This chapter also
applies when one public organisation supplies another with goods or services; and
to certain statutory local authority charges set by ministers.
6.3 Setting a charge: standard practice
6.3.1 When a charge for a public service is to be made, it is normally necessary to
rely on powers in primary legislation. The legislation should be designed so that
ministers decide, or have significant influence over, both the structure of the charge
and its level. It is common to frame primary legislation in general terms, using
secondary legislation to settle detail.
6.3.2 Treasury consent is required for all proposals to extend or vary charging
schemes. This holds even if the primary legislation does not call for it, or the
delegated authorities within which the organisation operates would otherwise allow
it.
6.3.3 It is sometimes possible to rely on secondary legislation rather than primary to
determine charges:
«an order under s56 of the Finance Act 1973;
+ restructuring of charges can sometimes be achieved by an order under
5102 of the Finance (no 2) Act 1987 (see box 6.1).
Box 6.1: restructuring charges using S.102
+ As102 order can extend or vary powers in existing primary legislation.
* It can permit restructuring by specifying factors to be taken into account when setting
fees.
* Explicit prior Treasury consent is always essential.
But
+ As102 order cannot create a power for new charges where no primary legislation
exists.
* Nor can it lift restrictions in (or in any other way undermine) primary legislation.
* Parliament is usually sceptical because s102 substitutes secondary for primary
legislation.
41
