Annex 4.5
Senior Responsible Owner
Accountability
A4.5.1 Senior Responsible Owners (SRO) for Major Projects (as defined in the Government's
Major Project Portfolio) are in a special position in that they are expected to account
for and explain the decisions and actions they have taken to deliver the projects for
which they have personal responsibility. This line of accountability should be made
clear to SROs in their appointment letter which is published on GOV.UK.
A4.5.2 The Government publishes on an annual basis a list of the SROs for the
Government's Major Project Portfolio (as defined by the Infrastructure and Projects
Authority).
A4.5.3 Where a Committee wishes to take evidence from an SRO of one of these
major projects it will be on the understanding that the SRO will be expected to
account for the implementation and delivery of the project and for their own
actions. Appointment letters will make clear the point at which an SRO becomes
directly accountable for the implementation of the project in question. The SRO will
also be able to disclose to the Committee where a Minister or official has intervened
to change the project during the implementation phase in a way which has
implications for cost and/or timeline of implementation. In this respect the SRO
should also be able to disclose their advice about any such changes.
A4.5.4 Accounting Officers are ultimately accountable for the performance of all the
business under their control, including major projects for which an individual SRO
has direct accountability and responsibility. And in this respect, if a Select
Committee calls for evidence from an SRO, the Accounting Officer of the
department may also be called to support the SRO at a hearing.
A4.5.5 This line of direct accountability for SROs does not alter the special position
and relationship of Accounting Officers with the PAC.
A4.5.6 The Government Functional Standard GovS 002: Project Delivery sets the
expectations for the direction and management of portfolios, programmes and
projects for all government departments and arm's length bodies. An SRO should
refer to this standard to ensure the breadth of practices required for successful
delivery are used. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/project-delivery-
functional-standard
A4.5.7 Further information on the accountability, relationship to other key
leadership roles in project delivery and the selection and appointment of an SRO is
available in Infrastructure and Project Authority guidance on the role of the senior
responsible owner. https:/www.qgov.uk/government/publications/the-role-of-the-
senior-responsible-owner

92
