regulator could recover the cost of registration to provide a licence and of
associated supervision. It may be appropriate to charge different levies to different
kinds of licensees, depending on the cost of providing different kinds of licences (see
box 6.2).
6.6 Commercial services
6.6.1 Some public sector services are discretionary, ie no statute underpins them.
Services of this kind are often supplied into competitive markets, though sometimes
the public sector supplier has a monopoly or other natural advantage.
6.6.2 Charges for these services should be set at a commercial rate. The rate should
deliver a commercial return on the use of the public resources deployed in supplying
the service. So the financial target should be in line with market practice, using a risk
weighted rate of return on capital relevant to the sector concerned. The rate of
return used in pricing calculations for sales into commercial markets should be:
«for sales into commercial markets, in line with competitors’ assessment
of their business risk, rising to higher rates for more risky activities; or
«where a public sector body supplies another, or operates in a market
without competitors, the standard rate for the cost of capital (see
annex 6.1).
6.6.3 If a publicly provided commercial service does not deliver its target rate of
return, outstanding deficits should be recovered, eg by adjusting charges. Any
objective short of achieving the target rate of return calls for ministerial agreement,
and should be cleared with the Treasury. But discretionary services should never
undermine the supplier organisation's public duties, including its financial
objective(s).
6.6.4 It is important for public suppliers of commercial services to respect
competition law. Otherwise public services using resources acquired with public
funds might disturb or distort the fair operation of the market, especially where the
public sector provider might be in a dominant position: see annex 6.3.
6.7 Disclosure
6.7.1 Itis important that parliament is fully informed about use of charges. Each
year the annual report of the charging organisation should give:
+ the amounts charged
+ full costs and unit costs
+ total income received
+ the nature and extent of any subsidies and/or overcharging
+ the financial objectives and how far they have been met.
6.7.2 To keep parliament properly informed, Estimates should display details of
expected income from charges. The Estimates Manual explains how the controls
work.
44
