* could the issue have a material impact on the accounts?

* might national security or data integrity be put at risk?
Accounting Officer System Statements
A3.1.12 Government departments should include in their governance statements a
summary account of how they achieve accountability for the grants they distribute
to local government, schools, similar local government organisations and/or the
NHS. It should cover:

«an account of how resources are distributed, eg in response to needs or
desired change;

«how the AO gains assurance about probity in the use of public funds;

«how the AO achieves or encourages value for money in the local use of
grants, eg through local arrangements which provide incentives to
achieve good value;

+ the use the AO makes of disaggregated information about
performance, including investigating apparent outliers and/or requiring
those responsible locally to explain their results.

A3.1.13 This part of the governance statement should usually be backed by an
accounting officer systems statement, which are published on gov.uk.2 Guidance on
accounting officer system statements can be found online. The system statement
must be clear on the core data and information flows that the system will rely on.
An understanding of these core data requirements should be developed
collaboratively with the entities to be included within the system statement and with
users to meet the need for effective accountability locally and nationally.

A3.1.14 Accounting officer system statements should evolve to reflect improving
practice. Where a Department proposes making major changes, it should contact
Treasury and also consider consulting the relevant Parliamentary committees by
providing them with a draft and the opportunity to comment.

External audit

A3.1.15 The organisation's external auditor will review the governance statement
for its consistency with the audited financial statement. The external auditor may
report on:

+ any inconsistency between evidence collected in the course of the audit
and the discussion of the governance statement; and/or;

+ any failure to meet the requirement to comply with or explain
departures from the Corporate Governance Code or any other
authoritative guidance.

3 See, https Awww. gov.ukigovernment/collections/accounting-officer-system-statements
75
