A4.11.3 When deciding on appropriate action, taking legal advice, organisations
should consider:

e the type of overpayment;

e whether the recipient accepted the money in good or bad faith;

e the cost-effectiveness of recovery action (either in house or using
external companies). Advice that a particular course of action appears
to offer good value may not be conclusive since it may not take account
of the wider public interest;

e any relevant personal circumstances of the payee, including defences
against recovery;

e the length of time since the payment in question was made; and

e the need to deal equitably with overpayments to a group of people in
similar circumstances.

A4.11.4 Itis good practice to consider routinely whether particular cases reveal
concerns about the soundness of the control systems and their operation. It is
important to put failings right.

Payments made with parliamentary authority

A4.11.5 Sometimes overpayments are made using specific legal powers but making
mistakes of fact or law. These are legally recoverable, subject to the provisions of the
Limitation Acts and other defences against recovery (see below). The presumption
should always be that recovery should be pursued, irrespective of the circumstances
in which it arose.

Good faith

A4.11.6 The decision on how far recovery of an overpayment should be pursued in
a particular case will be influenced by whether the recipient has acted in good or
bad faith:

e where recipients of overpayments have acted in good faith, eg
genuinely believing that the payment was right, they may be able to
use this as a defence (though good faith alone is not a sufficient
defence);

e where recipients of overpayments have acted in bad faith, recovery of
the full amount overpaid should always be sought.

A4.11.7 Recipients may be inferred to have acted in bad faith if they have wilfully
suppressed material facts or otherwise failed to give timely, accurate and complete
information affecting the amount payable. Other cases, eg those involving
recipients’ carelessness, may require judgement. And some cases may involve such
obvious error, eg where an amount stated is very different from that paid, that no
recipient could reasonably claim to have acted in good faith.

A4.11.8 In forming a judgement about whether payments have been received in
good faith, due allowance should be made for:

e the complexity of some entitlements, eg to pay or benefits;

112
