e spending above the amount provided in an Estimate; and

e irregular expenditure outside the ambit, eg on an unauthorised service.
5.4.4 Parliament usually regards the latter as particularly unsatisfactory because it
means that the department concerned has flouted parliament's intentions? and
may have defective systems of control. The auditor may identify such excesses as
spending not covered by statutory powers, even if the total amount spent does not
exceed the voted limit.
5.4.5 Expenditure in excess of provision on an activity agreed by parliament is also
to be avoided since the authority of a Supply and Appropriation Act is just as
essential as specific statutory authority (box 2.1). It is possible, with Treasury
agreement, to raise the amount in an Estimate during the course of the year in a
Supplementary. But otherwise accounting officers should reduce, reprioritise or
postpone use of resources to keep within the provision parliament has agreed for
the year.
5.5 Commitments
5.5.1 Parliament is not bound! to honour ministers’ commitments unless and until
there are statutory powers to meet them and it authorises public funds to finance
them (through an Estimate) in a given year. This discipline is especially important
when ministers plan a new service.
5.5.2 Because commitments can evolve into spending, they should always be
scrutinised and appraised as stringently as proposals for consumption (box 4.8 may
help). Some departments may agree with the Treasury blanket authority for defined
and limited ranges of non-statutory commitments, eg indemnities for board
members and commitments taken on the normal course of business. All other non
statutory commitments are novel, contentious or repercussive, so Treasury approval
is always essential before they are undertaken.
5.5.3 Public sector organisations should give parliament prompt and timely notice of
any significant new commitments, whether using existing statutory powers or to be
honoured through future legislation. Non statutory contingent liabilities (above a
specified threshold) should always be notified in this way. The process is set out in
annex 5.4.
12 je has breached the Concordat - see annex 2.3
13 Under the Concordat

35
