Constructive losses
A4.10.22 A constructive loss is a similar form of payment to stores losses and
fruitless payments, but one where procurement action itself caused the loss. For
example, stores or services might be correctly ordered, delivered or provided, then
paid for as correct; but later, perhaps because of a change of policy, they might
prove not to be needed or to be less useful than when the order was placed.
A4.10.23 Constructive losses need not be noted in the Losses Statement in the
annual accounts unless they are significant.
Claims waived or abandoned
A4.10.24 Losses may arise if claims are waived or abandoned because, though
properly made, it is decided not to present or pursue them. Some examples are in
box A4.10D.
A4.10.25 The following should not be treated as claims waived or abandoned.
«any claims wrongly identified or presented, whether in error or
otherwise. A claim should not, however, be regarded as withdrawn
where there is doubt as to whether it would succeed if pursued in a
court of law, or if the liability of the debtor has not or cannot be
accurately assessed;
= waivers or remission of tax. HMRC have special rules about remissions
of tax. Departments should consult the Treasury about treatment when
a case arises; or
+ aclaim for a refund of an overpayment which fails or is waived. This
should be regarded as a cash loss.
Box A4.10D: examples of waived and abandoned claims
* where itis decided to reduce the rate of interest on a loan, and therefore to waive the
right to receive the amount of the reduction
+ claims actually made and then reduced in negotiations or for policy reasons
* claims which a department intended to make, but which could not be enforced, or
were never presented
«failure to make claims or to pursue them to finality, e.g. owing to procedural delays
allowing the Limitations Acts (annex 4.11.11) to become applicable
* claims arising from actual or believed contractual or other legal obligations which are
not met (whether or not pursued), e.g. under default or liquidated damages clauses of
contracts
* amounts by which claims are reduced by compositions in insolvency cases, or in out-of-
court settlements, other than reductions arising from corrections of facts
+ claims dropped on legal advice, or because the amounts of liabilities could not be
determined
+ remission of interest on voted loans.
A4.10.26 Waivers should be noted in annual accounts in accordance with the FReM.
In addition:
109
