3.6.7. Adirection on regularity or propriety ground does not change that position
— that is it does not make the action regular or proper. It is important to note that a
direction does not permit unlawful action and does not protect against a court
finding unlawfulness.
3.7 Public Accounts Committee
3.7.1. The PAC may hold public hearings on the accounts of central government
organisations laid in parliament (see section 1.6). In practice most PAC hearings
focus on NAO value for money studies. The NAO seeks to agree the text of these
reports with the accounting officer(s) concerned so there is a clear undisputed
evidence base for PAC scrutiny.
3.7.2. When a hearing is scheduled, the PAC normally invites the accounting
officer(s) of the relevant institution(s) to attend as witness(es). An accounting officer
may be accompanied by appropriate officials. Where it is appropriate, and the PAC
agrees, an accounting officer may send a substitute. The PAC may also invite other
witnesses who may not be public servants to give insight into the background of the
subject in hand.
3.7.3. In answering questions, the accounting officer should take responsibility for
the organisation's business, even if it was delegated or if the events in question
happened before they were appointed accounting officer. In response to specific
PAC or Select Committee requests, previous accounting officers may also attend
relevant PAC hearings. Recalls of this kind should be assessed case by case,
depending on the circumstances. They are acceptable if the business in issue was
recent, and where the former accounting officer has had an opportunity to
comment before publication on any NAO report which the PAC is to investigate.
3.7.4. The PAC expects witnesses to give clear, accurate and complete evidence. If
evidence is sensitive, witnesses may ask to give it in private. Witnesses may offer
supplementary notes if the information sought is not to hand at the meeting. Any
such notes should be provided within one week unless the PAC is willing to grant an
extension. They should do so without delay.
3.7.5. The TOA (or an alternate) attends all PAC hearings. This enables the PAC to
explore any more general issues arising out of the hearing.
3.7.6. The evidence given by accounting officers at public hearings often feeds into
reports published by the PAC. These reports detail its findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
3.7.7. For each PAC report, the government responds to recommendations by
means of Treasury Minutes presented to Parliament by a Treasury minister,
indicating those the government accepts and those it does not accept. For those it
accepts, Treasury Minutes will include target implementation dates. For those it does
not accept, they will set out reasons for non-acceptance.
3.7.8. In addition, government departments and organisations are required to
report twice annually to Parliament on progress in implementing Committee
recommendations accepted by government. Treasury Minute Progress Reports are
used for this purpose.

18
