as possible, of the risk of difficult future financial environments. It is not
good practice to embark on a private finance arrangement if it is dependent
on other separate financial transactions taking place during the project's
lifetime
7.13.3 Procurement using private finance is a flexible, versatile and often effective
technique, so it should be considered carefully as a procurement option. Contracts
should normally be built up using standard terms and guidance published by the
Treasury (see Annex 7.4). Departure from standard guidance needs to be approved
by the Treasury.
7.14 Commercial activity
7.14.1 When public bodies have assets which are not fully used but are to be
retained, it is good practice to consider exploiting the spare capacity to generate a
commercial return in the public interest. This is essentially part of good asset
management.
7.14.2 Any kind of public sector asset can and should be considered. Candidates
include both physical and intangible assets, for example land, buildings, equipment,
software and intellectual property (see annex 4.15). A great variety of business
models is possible.
7.14.3 Such commercial services always go beyond the public sector supplier's core
duties. Because these assets concerned have been acquired with public funds, it is
important that services are priced fairly: see chapter 6. It is also important to respect
the rules on state aids: see annex 4.7. Central government organisations should
work through the checklist at box 7.7.

Box 7.7: planning commercial exploitation of existing assets

* define the service to be provided

«establish that any necessary vires and (if necessary) Estimate provision exist

«identify any prospective business partners and run a selection process

« if the proposed activity is novel, contentious, or likely to set a precedent elsewhere,

obtain Treasury approval

* take account of the normal requirements for propriety, regularity and value for money
7.14.4 While it makes sense to make full use of assets acquired with public
resources, such activity should not squeeze out, or risk damaging, a public sector
organisation's main objectives and activities. Similarly, it is not acceptable to acquire
assets just for the purpose of engaging in, or extending, commercial activity. If a
public sector supplier's commercial activity demands further investment to keep it
viable, reappraisal is usually appropriate. This should consider alternatives such as
selling the business, licensing it, bringing in private sector capital, or seeking other
way(s) of exploiting the underused potential in the assets or business.
7.145 lt is a matter of judgement when departments should inform parliament of
the existence, or growth, of significant commercial ventures. It is good practice to
consult the Treasury in good time on this point so that parliament can be kept
properly informed and not misled.

55
