Box 2.5: expenditure which may rely on a Supply and Appropriation Act

* routine administration costs: employment costs, rent, cleaning etc

* lease agreements, eg for photocopiers, lifts

* contractual obligations to purchase goods or services (eg where single year contracts
might be bad value)

+ expenditure using prerogative powers such as defence of the realm and international
treaty obligations

In all the three cases in paragraph 2.5.3, departments may rely on the sole authority
of a Supply and Appropriation Act (the culmination of the Estimates process)
without the need for specific legal authority, provided that the other conditions in
box 2.1 are met.

Box 2.6: modest or temporary expenditure which may rely on a Supply and Appropriation Act

either services or initiatives lasting no more than two years, eg a pilot study or one off intervention

or expenditure of no more than £1.75m a year (amount adjusted from time to time)

provided that there is no specific legislation covering these matters before parliament and existing

statutory restrictions are respected.

These conditions are demanding. Treasury consent is required before they may be relied on.

2.6 New services

2.6.1 When ministers decide on a new activity, all the conditions in box 2.1 must be
met before it can begin. In practical terms this means that most significant new
policies which are intended to persist require specific primary legislation.
Sometimes ministers want to start early on a new policy which is intended to
continue but whose enabling legislation has not yet secured royal assent. It may be
possible to make limited preparation for delivery of the new service before royal
assent, but to do so it will usually be necessary to consider borrowing from the
Contingencies Fund (see annex 2.4). Access to this Fund is controlled by the
Treasury, subject to the conditions in box 2.7. Specific Treasury consent is always
required.

Box 2.7: conditions for access to the contingencies fund (see also annex 2.4)

* the proposed expenditure must be urgent and in the public interest, ie with wider
benefits to outweigh the convention of awaiting parliamentary authority (political
imperative is not enough)

* the relevant bill must have successfully passed second reading in the House of
Commons

* the legislation must be certain, or virtually certain, to pass into law with no substantive
change in the near future, and usually within the financial year

+ the department responsible must explain clearly to parliament what is to take place,
why, and by when matters should be placed on a normal footing.

1
