Non-standard notification
A5.4.36 Sometimes it is not possible to give details of a contingent liability with full
transparency. In such cases the department should write to the chairs of both the
PAC and departmental committee to provide the same details as those outlined in
paragraph A5.4.24, with the same notice period. The letters should explain the need
for confidentiality. Any objection by either chair should be approached in the same
way as MPs’ objections (paragraph A.5.4.27). If departments continue to have
concerns about writing to parliament, in particularly sensitive or confidential cases,
they should seek advice from the Treasury.
A5.4.37 Sometimes departments want to report an urgent contingent liability
providing less than the required 14 days notice. In such cases, the department
should follow the procedure in paragraph A.5.4.27 and explain the need for
urgency, agreeing revised wording to the final standard paragraph with the
Treasury.
A5.4.38 If the proposal is more urgent than this rule would allow, the department
should write to the chairs of the PAC and the departmental committee, giving the
information in paragraph A.5.4.28 and explaining the need for urgency. Where
possible, the Chairs should be given 14 working days from receipt of the letter to
raise an objection in writing, in which case the department would withhold final
approval to proceed with incurring the liability pending an examination of the
objection. As a matter of record, when parliament reconvenes, a Written Ministerial
Statement and departmental Minute should be laid explaining what has happened,
including any liabilities undertaken.
A5.4.39 The same procedure as in paragraph A.5.4.29 should be used to report
liabilities during a parliamentary recess. In such cases the notice period should be
14 working days notice, ie excluding weekends and bank holidays.
A5.4.40 Similarly, it is possible that a department might want to undertake a non-
statutory contingent liability when parliament is dissolved. Every effort should be
made to avoid this, since members cease to be MPs on dissolution, and committees
will be reconstituted in the new parliament. If the department nonetheless
considers the proposed liability to be essential, it should consult the Treasury. When
parliament reconvenes a Written Ministerial Statement should be laid explaining
what has happened, including any liabilities undertaken.
Reporting liabilities publicly
A5.4.41 Any changes to existing liabilities should be reported in the same way as
they were originally notified to parliament, explaining the reasons for the changes.
If an originally confidential liability (see paragraph A5.4.29) can be reported
transparently, the standard Minute (paragraph A.5.4.24) should be laid.
A5.4.42 Departments should report all outstanding single liabilities, or schemes of
liabilities, in their accounts unless they are confidential. Any which would fall as a
direct charge on the Consolidated Fund should be reported in the Consolidated
Fund accounts. The conventions in the FreM should be used.
A5.4.43 Estimates should similarly be noted with amounts of any contingent or
actual liabilities. The figures quoted should be the best assessments possible at the
150
