Claims between public sector organisations
A4.4.13 If two uninsured departments are involved in an incident causing loss to
one or other, it is immaterial to the Exchequer whether one claims on the other for
the damage. For small claims it would not be value for money for the Exchequer to
make interdepartmental adjustments in the case of minor damage. Similar waiver
arrangements should apply up to mutually agreed limits between other public sector
organisations. But waiver arrangements of this kind are not appropriate where there
are rights of claim against third parties. It will always be regarded as novel,
contentious, or repercussive for one central government organisation to seek legal
redress from another central government organisation through the courts, meaning
that Treasury consent is always required.
A4.4.14 Box A4.4D shows how to proceed when one central government
organisation makes a larger claim against one or more others.
Box A4.4D: Handling claims between public sector organisations
Insurance status Settlement of claims
All insured Insurers settle claims
All uninsured Organisation(s) at fault negotiate about whether to
reimburse the other(s)
Organisation at fault uninsured, other Insured organisation claims on its insurance policy.
organisation(s) insured Uninsured organisation(s) deal with claims from the
insurers on the basis of strict legal liability
Organisation at fault insured, other organisation(s) Uninsured organisation(s) seek financial satisfaction
uninsured through the insurers of the organisation(s) at fault
Vehicles
A4.4.15 Most ALBs insure third-party vehicle claims to comply with the Road Traffic
Acts. Public sector organisations that are not insured for traffic accidents should
refer any third-party claims, either for or against, to the Treasury Solicitor who acts
on behalf of the government.
A4.4.16 Many claims between public sector organisations involving damage to, or
loss caused by, vehicles, can be handled using the arrangements in paragraph
A4.4.13.
A4.4.17 Vehicles travelling in EU countries must comply with Directives. These
require vehicles operating in another's territory to be covered by insurance to the
extent required by the legislation in territory of the journey, unless there are
acceptable alternative arrangements, eg indemnities.
Loans
A4.4.18 When government assets are loaned to a body other than a public sector
organisation which does not insure, it is important to protect the interests of the
lending organisation. So the borrower should insure against damage or loss of the
89
