«if applicable, explain why the matter is urgent and cannot observe the
normal deadlines (paragraph A5.4.26_);
+ explain that authority for any expenditure required under the liability
will be sought through the normal Supply procedure;
«be copied to the chairs of both the PAC and departmental committee.
A5.4.32 The contingent liability should not go live until 14 parliamentary sitting
days, after the Minute has been laid. Every effort should be made to ensure that the
full waiting period falls while parliament is in session. Where a contingent liability is
reported less than 14 days before the end of the session, the contingent liability
should only go live after lying before parliament during 14 sitting days, ie some days
after the start of the next session.
A5.4.33 If an MP objects by letter, Parliamentary Question or Early Day Motion, the
indemnity should not normally go live until the objection has been answered. In the
case of an Early Day Motion, the Member(s) should be given an opportunity to
make direct personal representations to the minister, eg proactively arranging a
meeting with them. The Treasury should be kept in touch with representations
made by MPs and of the outcome.
A5.4.34 If, exceptionally, the guarantee or indemnity would give rise to an actual
liability, the department should consult the Treasury about the wording of the
Minute. The department should discuss the implications for the actual liability on its
budget, Estimate and accounts.
A5.4.35 There is not usually a requirement to notify parliament in instances where a
contingent liability arises due to events outside a department or ALB's control rather
than through an active policy decision. An example of something that would be
outside a department or ALB’s control would be legal proceedings being brought
against them. Events of this nature should still be disclosed in the entity's Annual
Report and Accounts in line with the requirements of the Government Financial
Reporting Manual (FReM). :
Box A5.4C: standard text for departmental Minutes on liabilities
Opening passage
It is normal practice, when a government department proposes to undertake a contingent liability in
excess of £300,000 for which there is no specific statutory authority, for the Minister concerned to
present a departmental Minute to parliament a giving particulars of the liability created and explaining
the circumstances; and to refrain from incurring the liability until fourteen parliamentary sitting days
after the issue of the Minute, except in cases of special urgency.
The body of the Minute should include:
If the liability is called, provision for any payment will be sought through the normal Supply
procedure.
Closing passage
The Treasury has approved the proposal in principle. If, during the period of fourteen parliamentary
sitting days beginning on the date on which this Minute was laid before parliament, a member
signifies an objection by giving notice of a Parliamentary Question or by otherwise raising the matter
in parliament, final approval to proceed with incurring the liability will be withheld pending an
examination of the objection.
149
