6.3.4 When deciding the level of a charge, it is important to define:.
+ the range(s) of services for which a charge is to be made;
«how any categories of service are to be differentiated, if at all, in setting
charges.
6.3.5 The standard approach is that the same charge should apply to all users of a
defined category of service, so recovering full costs for that category of service.
Different charges may be set for objectively different categories of service costing
different amounts to provide. Box 6.2 shows how this can work.
Box 6.2: how different charges can apply to different categories of service
Different categories could be recognised by:
« distinguishing supply differences, eg in person, by post or online
* priorities, eg where a quicker service costs more
* quality, eg charging more for a premium service with more features
* recognising structural differences, where it costs more to supply some consumers.
6.3.6 However, different groups of customers should not be charged different
amounts for a service costing the same, eg charging firms more than individuals.
Similarly, cross subsidies are not standard practice, eg charging large businesses
more than small ones where the cost of supply is the same.
6.3.7 Charges within and among central government organisations should normally
also be at full cost, including the standard cost of capital. Any different approach
would cause one party to make a profit or loss not planned in budgets agreed by
ministers collectively; while the customer organisation(s) would conversely face
charges higher or lower than full costs. A number of objectionable consequences
might flow from this. For instance, a question of state aid could arise; or private
sector consumers of the customer organisation might be charged distorted fees.
6.3.8 Shared services (box 6.3) are a special case of charging within the public
sector.
Box 6.3: shared services
It is often possible to make economies of scale by arranging for several public service organisations to
join together to deliver services cheaper, eg by using their joint purchasing power. One organisation
supplies the other(s). Since all the parties should lower their costs, the accounting officer of each
organisation should have no difficulty in recognising improved value for money for the Exchequer as a
whole and so justify going ahead.
Public sector organisations supplying (or improving) shared services should consult the Treasury at an
early stage of planning. Typically supplier organisations face the cost of setting up provision on a
larger scale than they need for their own use. As with setting up any new service, plans in budgets
should amortise initial costs so that they can be recovered over an appropriate period from the start of
the service. More detail on shared services is in section 7.5.
It is not acceptable for supplier organisations to plan to profit from, or subsidise, supply to customer
organisations in the public sector. Nor is it acceptable for accounting officers to resist shared services
just because the impact on their own organisation is not perceived to be favourable.
42
