Stores losses
A4.10.15 Stores losses are, in effect, money spent without the authority of
parliament. In establishing the amount of the loss, and hence whether the annual
account should be noted, the net value of the loss after crediting any sums
recovered will be the determining factor.
A4.10.16 Losses of stores arising from culpable causes should be noted in
departmental records, in accordance with normal practice. Such losses should also
be noted in the annual account, to ensure that such losses are brought to the
attention of parliament in the appropriate manner, and to aid departmental
management in managing and accounting for stores.
A4.10.17 Where there is an identifiable claim against some person, the loss need
not be noted immediately. However, if the department subsequently decides to
waive the claim, or finds that it cannot be presented or enforced, the loss should be
treated as an abandoned claim (see paragraph A.4.10.24) and noted accordingly.
A4.10.18 Any loss recoverable from a third party, where a decision is taken to waive
recovery because of a knock for knock agreement, should be noted as a stores loss.
A4.10.19 Where stores are to be written off, gifted, or transferred to other
departments, they should be valued in accordance with the FReM, unless
circumstances justify exceptional treatment, or other arrangements have been
agreed:
Fruitless payments
A4.10.20 A fruitless payment is a payment which cannot be avoided because the
recipient is entitled to it even though nothing of use to the department will be
received in return. Some examples are in box A4.10C.
A4.10.21 As fruitless payments will be legally due to the recipient, they are not
regarded as special payments. However, as due benefit has not been received in
return, they should be treated as losses, and brought to the attention of parliament
in the same way as stores losses.
Box A4.10C: examples of fruitless payments
A fruitless payment is a payment for which liability ought not to have been incurred, or where the
demand for the goods and services in question could have been cancelled in time to avoid liability, for
example:
« forfeitures under contracts as a result of some error or negligence by the department;
«payment for travel tickets or hotel accommodation wrongly booked or no longer
needed, or for goods wrongly ordered or accepted;
* the cost of rectifying design faults caused by a lack of diligence or defective professional
practices; and
* extra costs arising from failure to allow for foreseeable changes in circumstances.
3 Stores held by the Ministry of Defence may be valued according to thei estimated supply price.
108
