5.9 External borrowing
5.9.1 Public sector organisations may borrow from private sector sources only if the
transaction delivers better value for money for the Exchequer as a whole. Because
non-government lenders face higher costs, in practice it is usually difficult to satisfy
this condition unless efficiency gains arise in the delivery of a project (eg PFI).
Treasury agreement to any such borrowing, including by ALBs, is also essential.
Nevertheless it can sometimes be expedient for public sector bodies to borrow short
term, for example by overdraft.
5.9.2 When a sponsor department's ALB borrows, the department should normally
arrange to guarantee the loan to secure a fine rate. This is not always possible, eg
when a guarantee would rank as a state aid (see annex 4.7). A department which
guarantees a loan normally’s needs a specific statutory power as well as Estimate
provision. On exceptional occasions temporary non-statutory loans may be possible.
5.9.3 The case for a guarantee should be scrutinised as thoroughly as if indeed a
loan were made. Since guarantees always entail entering into contingent liabilities,
parliament must be notified when a loan guarantee is given, using the reporting
procedures in annex 5.4.
5.9.4 Occasionally there is a case for an ALB to borrow in foreign currency in its own
name rather than the government's. Because this can affect the credit standing of
the government as a sovereign borrower, and may well cost more, it is essential to
consult the Treasury beforehand. The same principles apply to the borrowing of any
bodies, such as subsidiaries, for which a department's ALBs are responsible.
5.10 Multiple sources of funding
5.10.1 Sometimes public sector organisations derive funding from more than one
source. Examples of funding other than voted funds include national insurance
contributions (which are dedicated to the National Insurance Fund), lottery funding
and charitable funding. All of these alternatives usually come with specific
conditions attached.
5.10.2 Organisations in this position should segregate and account separately for
the different streams of funding so that they can apply the relevant terms and
conditions to each. In particular, where a source of funding is designated to a
particular purpose, it is rarely appropriate to use another instead. In those
circumstances switching is novel and contentious and thus requires Treasury
approval.
5.10.3 When there is doubt about how to handle multiple streams of funding, it is
good practice to consult the Treasury.
5.11 Cash management
5.11.1 The various organisations in central government together handle very large
flows of public funds. At the end of each working day, the Exchequer must either
borrow from the money market or place funds on deposit with the money market,
16 The Concordat applies here in just the same way as to spending ~ see annex 2.3

38
