Annex 3.1
It is fundamental to each accounting officer's responsibilities to manage and control the resources
used in his or her organisation. The governance statement, a key feature of the organisation's annual
report and accounts, manifests how these duties have been carried out in the course of the year. It
has three components: corporate governance, risk management and, in the case of some
departments, oversight of certain local responsibilities.

Purpose

A3.1.1 Each accounting officer (AO) delegates responsibilities within his or her organisation

50 as to control its business and meet the standards set out in box 3.1 (see chapter

3). The systems used to do this should give adequate insight into the business of the

organisation and its use of resources to allow the AO to make informed decisions

about progress against business plans and if necessary steer performance back on

track. In doing this the AO is usually supported by a board.

A3.1.2 These responsibilities are central to the AO’s duties. To carry them out the

AO needs to develop a keen sense of the risks and opportunities the organisation

faces. In the light of the board's assessment of the organisation's appetite for risk,

the AO needs to decide how to respond to the evolving perceived risks.

A3.1.3 The governance statement, for which the AO takes personal responsibility,

brings together all these judgements about use of public resources as part of the

annual report and accounts. It should give the reader a clear understanding of the

dynamics and control structure of the business. Essentially, it records the

stewardship of the organisation. Supplementing the accounts, it should provide a

sense of the organisation's vulnerabilities and resilience to challenges.

Preparing the governance statement

A3.1.4 The governance statement is published in each organisation's annual report

and accounts. It should be assembled from work through the year to gain assurance

about performance and insight into the organisation's risk profile, its responses to

the identified and emerging risks and its success in tackling them.

A3.1.5 There is no set template for the governance statement.

A3.1.6 The AO and the board have a number of inputs into this process:

«the board's annual review of its own processes and practices, informed
by the views of its audit committee on the organisation's assurance
arrangements;

72
