Working with others
It often makes sense for public sector organisations to work with partners to deliver public services. This
chapter outlines how sponsor departments should keep track of their ALBs, and where necessary control
their activities. It is important that the public interest and the need to keep parliament informed are given
priority in setting up and operating these relationships.
7.1 The case for working in partnership
7.1.1 Public sector organisations may be able to deliver public services more
successfully if they work with another body. Central government departments may
find it advantageous to delegate certain functions to ALBs that can be free to
concentrate on them without conflict of interest. Or it may be helpful to harness the
expertise of a commercial or civil society sector organisation with skills and leverage
not available to the public sector.
7.1.2 Any such relationship inevitably entails tensions as well as opportunities. The
autonomy of each organisation needs to be buttressed by sufficient accountability
to give parliament and the public confidence that public resources are used wisely.
7.1.3 It can be important that an ALB is demonstrably independent. This in itself
does not determine the ALB’s form or structure. Independence is achieved by
specifying how the ALB is to operate. Functional independence is compatible with
financial oversight by the ALB's parent department and with accountability.
7.1.4 tis generally helpful to deal with any potential conflicts head on by deciding
at the outset how the relationship(s) between the parties should work. The key
issues to tackle are set out in box 7.1.
Box 7.1: Issues for partnerships with public sector members
. The decision to engage with a partner should rest on evaluation of a business case assessed
against a number of alternatives, including doing nothing.
o Conflicts of interest should be identified so that handling strategies can be agreed, eg by
establishing early warning processes or safeguards.
o The cultural fit of the partners should be close enough to give each confidence to trust the
other.
. Accountability for use of public funds should not be weakened.
The terms of engagement, including governance, should be documented in a framework agreement or
equivalent (see box 7.2).
7.2 Setting up new arm's length bodies
7.2.1 When a sponsor department sets up a new ALB, the nature of the new body
should be decided early in the process. It is sensible for the functions of the new
body to help determine this choice. Annex 7.1 offers advice and sources of guidance
on setting up a new ALB and compares the characteristics of agencies, non-
departmental public bodies (NDPBs) and non-ministerial departments (NMDs).
Departments should consult the Treasury and the Cabinet Office about making the
choice.
46
