6.4 Setting a charge: non-standard approaches
6.4.1 Ministers’ policy objectives for a service where a charge is levied may not fit
the standard model in section 6.3. In such cases it may be possible to deliver the
policy objective in another way. Some ways of doing this are described below.
Explicit Treasury consent, and often formal legal authority, is always required for
such variations. It is desirable to consult the Treasury at an early stage to make sure
that the intended strategy can be delivered.
Charging below cost
6.4.2 Where ministers decide to charge less than full cost, there should be an
agreed plan to achieve full cost recovery within a reasonable period. Each case
needs to be evaluated on its merits and obtain Treasury clearance. If the subsidy is
intended to last, this decision should be documented and periodically reconsidered.
Charging above cost
6.4.3 ONS normally classifies charges higher than the cost of provision, or not
clearly related to a service to the charge payer, as taxes. Such charges always call for
explicit ministerial decision as well as specific statutory authority. The Treasury does
not automatically allow departments to budget for net expenditure associated with
above cost charges. Netting off, or netting off up to full costs, may be agreed in
certain instances, considering each case on its merits.
6.4.4 Sometimes when a change of this kind is classified as a tax, departments also
propose to assign its revenue. The Treasury always treat such proposals with caution
(see 5.6.3).
Cross subsidies
6.4.5 Cross subsidies always involve a mixture of overcharging and undercharging,
even if the net effect is to recover full costs for the service as a whole. So cross
subsidised charges are normally classified as taxes. They always call for explicit
ministerial decision and parliamentary approval through either primary legislation or
as102 order.
Information services
6.4.6 In the public interest, information may be provided free or at low charge. This
approach recognises the value of helping the general public obtain the data they
require to function in the modern world. There are some exceptions - see annex 6.2.
6.5 Levies
6.5.1 Compulsory levies, eg payments for licences awarded by statutory regulators,
or duties to finance industry specific research foundations, are normally classified as
taxation. Such levies may be justified in the wider public interest, not because they
provide a direct beneficial service to those who pay them. Depending on the
circumstances, the Treasury may allow regulators to retain the fees charged if this
approach is efficient and in the public interest.
6.5.2 As with other fees and charges, levies should be designed to recover full costs.
If the legislation permits, the charge can cover the costs of the statutory body, eg a
43
