+ Consider whether any retained assets have potential to generate revenue through commercial
services.

A4.15.8 Knowledge assets (also known as intangible assets, some examples of which are
listed above in Box A4.15A) should be considered as part of a public sector organisation's
asset management strategy. Proper management of such assets is essential for the efficient
and effective use of resources within public sector organisations, and it is therefore important
that organisations are able to identify, protect, and maximise the value of these assets. To
assist with this, government has published guidance to support organisations and clarify best
practice for public sector knowledge asset management’, and recommends that
organisations:
. develop a strategy for managing their knowledge assets, as part of their wider asset
management strategy
. appoint a Senior Responsible Owner for knowledge assets who has clear responsibility
for the organisation's knowledge asset management strategy
Efficiency improvements
A4.15.9 Efficiency in the use of workspace may make it possible for a public sector organisation
to occupy less space. It is good practice to dispose of surplus property, or to share
accommodation on the civil estate with other public sector organisations where this is
practicable. It may be necessary to consider a budget transfer between organisations, with
Treasury consent, to help meet the initial relocation costs.
A4.15.10 Prior to marketing any land or building asset, public sector organisations should also
make use of the following:

+ “Disposal of Surplus Public Sector Land and Buildings — Protocols for Land holding
Departments” which describes the procedures to be followed to dispose of land
with development potential;

+ The Cabinet Office's National Property Controls which detail the rules on lease
extensions, lease renewals, acquisitions, disposals as well as required space
standards associated with major refurbishments of buildings;

+ The Register of Surplus Land, part of ePIMS (electronic Property Management
Information Mapping Service), a mandatory central database recording information
on the civil estate. The data base does not cover leasehold property with less than
99 years outstanding;

+ the Civil Estate Occupancy Agreement governing relationships among Crown
bodies sharing accommodation and the Civil Estate Coordination Protocol which is
designed to improve the planning, acquisition, management, rationalisation and
disposal of property and other workspace on the civil estate;

+ latest guidance and advice available from the Government Property Unit.

1 hitps/www. gov uk/government/publicationg/knowledge-asset-management-in-government
130
