+ extra-statutory payments to claimants (where a similar statutory scheme
exists);
+ exgratia payments to customers (where no established scheme exists);
or
+ severance payments to employees leaving before retirement or before
the end of their contract and involving payments above what the
relevant pension scheme allows.
4.7.5 Again it is important that these payments are made in the public interest,
objectively and without favouritism. The disciplines parliament expects of central
government entities are set out in annex 4.13, which explains the notification
procedure to be followed for larger one-off transactions of this kind. The steps to be
considered when setting up statutory or extra-statutory compensation schemes are
discussed in annex 4.14.
4.8 Unusual circumstances
4.8.1 Sometimes public sector organisations face dilemmas in meeting their
commitments. They may have a legal or business obligation which would be
uneconomic or inappropriate to carry out assiduously to the letter. In such cases it
can be justifiable to seek a pragmatic, just and transparent alternative approach,
appropriately reported to parliament in the organisation's annual accounts. One-off
schemes of this kind are always novel and so require Treasury approval, not least
because they may also require legislation or have to rest on the authority of a Supply
and Appropriation Act (see section 2.5). Box 4.6 suggests precedented examples.

Box 4.6: examples of one-off pragmatic schemes

*  Acourt ruling could mean that a public sector organisation owed each of a large
number of people a very small sum of money. The cost of setting up and operating an
accurate payment scheme might exceed the total amount due. The organisation could
instead make a one-off payment of equivalent value to a charity representing the
recipient group.

*  Adispute with a contractor might conclude that the contractor owed a public sector
organisation an amount too big for it to meet in a single year while staying solvent. The
customer might instead agree more favourable payment terms, with appropriate
safeguards, if this arrangement provides better value for money.

4.9 staff
4.9.1 Each public sector organisation should have sufficient staff with the skills and
expertise to manage its business efficiently and effectively. The span of skills required
should match the organisation's objectives, responsibilities and resources, balancing
professional, practical or operational skills and policy makers, and recognising the
value of each discipline. Succession and disaster planning should ensure that the
organisation can cope robustly with changes in the resources available, including
unforeseen disruption.
4.9.2 Public sector organisations should seek to be fair, honest and considerate
employers. Some desirable characteristics are suggested in box 4.7.

28
