Claims administration

A4.4.6 Managing claims against third parties can be time-consuming and require
expert attention. Insurance companies may be better placed than public sector
organisations to deal with claims economically and efficiently. So contracting-out
claims administration to an insurance company might be more cost-effective than
retaining the work in-house.

Reporting

A4.4.7 Departments should inform their Treasury spending team of:

+ any decision to use the services of commercial insurance companies

+ any reviews of insurance, or alternatives to insurance, that might
contain lessons of wider application.

A4.4.8 In turn ALBs should consult their sponsor departments in similar
circumstances.

Dealing with losses

Uninsured losses (except traffic accidents)

A4.4.9 Where a loss occurs or a third-party claim is received, public sector
organisations should initially consider whether the loss should be made good or the
claim accepted. Thus:

«loss of or damage to assets: the question of repair or replacement
should always be carefully considered, taking account of the need for
the asset and current policies. This decision is, in effect, a new
investment decision and should be appraised accordingly;

+ third-party claims: the justification for the claim should be carefully
considered with appropriate legal advice.

A4.4.10 If the organisation decides to repair or replace an asset, or meet a third
party claim, it should normally expect to meet the cost from within its existing
allocations. The Treasury does not routinely entertain bids for additional resources in
such cases. If a bid did arise the Treasury would consider it on its merits and in the
light of the resources available, in the same way as other bids for increases in
provision. Similarly, ALBs should not normally expect their sponsor departments to
meet claims for reimbursement of loss.
Insured losses
A4.4.11 Public sector organisations should make insurance claims in accordance
with the terms of the policy.
A4.4.12 ALBs may retain amounts paid under commercial insurance policies to meet
expenditure resulting from losses or third-party claims. If it is decided not to replace
or to repair an insured asset, the sponsor department may reduce any grant in aid
payable to the ALB.

88
