prioritise its total risk exposure so that the board can take an informed strategic

approach to risk for the organisation as whole.

Responding to risk

A4.3.11 Each organisation needs to decide whether, and if so how, to respond to

its identified risks. Some standard responses are listed in box A4.3C.
Box A4.3C: Some standard responses to risk
Treat: a common response. Treatment can mean imposing controls so that the organisation can
continue to operate; or setting up prevention techniques. See box 4.3D for possible treatments.
Transfer: another organisation might carry out an activity in which it is more expert. Insurance is not
usually open to public sector organisations (see annex 4.4) but other forms of transfer are, eg using a
payroll bureau. Some risks cannot be transferred, especially reputational risk. So delegating
organisations should retain oversight of their agents, with scope for remedial action when necessary.
Terminate: it may be best to stop (or not to start) activities which involve intolerable risks or those
where no response can bring the residual risk to a tolerable level, eg failing projects where it is
cheaper to start again. This option is not always available in the public sector, which sometimes has to
shoulder difficult risks — typically remote but potentially serious ones — which the private sector can
choose to avoid.
Tolerate: for risks where the downside is containable with appropriate contingency plans; for some
where the possible controls cannot be justified (eg because they would be disproportionate); and for
unavoidable risks, eg terrorism.
Take the opportunity: boards may embrace some risks, accepting their downside perhaps with
controls or preventative action, in the expectation of beneficial outcomes. Avoiding all risk can be as
irresponsible as disregarding risk.

A4.3.12 In choosing responses, the acid test is whether the residual risk can be

made acceptable after action. All controls should be realistic, proportionate to the

intended reduction of risk, and offer good value for money. The more common

types are listed in box A4.3D.
Box A4.3D: Common controls
Preventive action: measures to eliminate or limit undesirable outcomes, eg improving training or risk
awareness; or stopping transfer of digital information using datasticks. Beware of imposing
unnecessary costs or damaging innovation.
Corrective controls: measures to deal with damaging aspects of realised risks, eg clauses to recover the
cost of failure of a contract. Includes contingency planning.
Directive controls: measures designed to specify the way in which a process is carried out to rule out
some obvious potential damage, eg hygiene requirements.
Detective controls: measures to identify damage so that it can be remedied quickly. Especially useful
where prevention is not appropriate, but can be a useful cross check elsewhere, eg stock controls.

A4.3.13 However it is treated, it is usually impossible to eliminate all risk. It would

often be poor value for money to do so were it possible. So it is good practice to

associate application of controls with contingency planning to cope with resolution

of damage when risks precipitate. Many organisations find it useful to dry run these

plans: first to check that they work, second to make sure they are proportionate and

third to boil out any unnecessary features they may have.

83
