The Board
A4.3.14 Risk management is a key governance task for the board. It should take a
strategic view of risk in the organisation in the round, factoring together all the
relevant input it can reasonably use. For example, it may consider to what extent
risks interact, cumulate or cancel each other out. And consideration of risk should
feature in all the board's significant decisions.
A4.3.15 It is good practice for the board to consider risk regularly as part of its
normal flow of management information about the organisation's activities. It is
good practice for each layer of management to give upward assurance about its
performance, so reinforcing responsibility through the structure.
A4.3.16 It is up to each board to decide how frequently it wants to consider risk.
Some set regular timetables to consider the whole risk register, while some choose
to look at parts of the risk register in a regular sequence. Scrutiny of this kind
enables the board to assess developments in context and make confident decisions
about their relevance and significance.
A4.3.17 Itis good practice for the board to make these assessments on the advice
of its Audit Committee, though it should form its own view. Audit committees can
also add value by chasing up implementation of the organisation's responses to PAC
reports. Each Audit Committee should be chaired by a non- executive board
member, drawing on input from the organisation's internal reporting and internal
audit functions.
A4.3.18 Having weighed the identified risks, the board should also seek to
distinguish unidentified risks, some of which may be remote. Box 4.38 offers some
possibilities though it is not exhaustive. This process may lead the board to
reconsider its strategy on risk tolerance.
A4.3.19 A useful focus of board risk work is supporting the AO in preparation of the
governance statement for publication in its annual report (se annex 3.1). It should
include an account of how the organisation has responded to risk and what it is
doing both to contain and manage risk; and also to rise to opportunities.
A4.3.20 More generally, the board should make sure that lessons are learned from
the organisation's experience. This applies particularly to perceived failures, eg an
unforeseen risk or a crystallised risk which turned out more damaging than
expected. But it is equally true of successes, especially those where risk was
managed well, to see whether there is anything to be gained by repeating effective
techniques elsewhere.
A4.3.21 Finally, the board should consider whether the organisation's risks are
being treated appropriately. If damage has been prevented, it may be possible to
adjust the existing response to risk to achieve equally successful results by less
expensive or less invasive techniques, eg replacing physical controls with security
cameras.
Departmental Groups
A4.3.22 Nearly all government departments sponsor one or more arm's length
bodies (ALBs) for which they take ultimate responsibility while allowing them a
degree of (or sometimes considerable) independence (see chapter 7). The accounts
84
