where commercial insurance would provide value for money?. Further information
about insurance generally is in annex 4.4.
4.5 Control of public expenditure
4.5.1 The Treasury coordinates a system through which departments are allocated
budget control totals for their public expenditure. Each department's allocation
covers its own spending and that of its associated ALBs. Within the agreed totals, it
has considerable discretion over setting priorities to deliver the public services for
which it is responsible.
4.5.2 Each public sector organisation should run efficient systems for managing
payments (see box 4.4). It should also keep its use of public resources within the
agreed budgets, take the limits into account when entering into commitments, and
generally ensure that its spending profile is sustainable.
4.5.3 Any major project, programme or initiative should be led by a senior
responsible owner (SRO). It is good practice to aim for continuity in such
appointmentsg.
Box 4.4: essentials of systems for committing and paying funds
* Selection of projects after appraisal of the alternatives (see the Green Book), including
the central clearance processes for larger commitments.
* Open competition to select suppliers from a diverse range, preferably specifying
outcomes rather than specific products, to achieve value for money (see annexes 4.6
and 4.7).
* Where feasible, procurement through multi-purchaser arrangements, shared services
and/or standard contracts to drive down prices.
* Effective internal controls to authorise acquisition of goods or services (including vetting
new suppliers), within any legal constraints.
* Separation of authorisation and payment, with appropriate controls, including
validation and recording, at each step to provide a clear audit trail.
* Checks that the goods or services acquired have been supplied in accordance with the
relevant contract(s) or agreement(s) before paying for them.
* Payment terms chosen or negotiated to provide good value.
* Accurate payment of invoices: once and on time, avoiding lateness penalties (see annex
4.8).
* A balance of preventive and detective controls to tackle and deter fraud, corruption and
other malpractice (see annex 4.9).
* Integrated systems to generate automatic audit trails which can be used to generate
accounts and which both internal and external auditors can readily check.
* Periodic reviews to benefit from experience, improve value for money or to implement
developments in good practice.
7 kg where private sector contractors take out single-site insurance policies because they are cheaper than each individual party
insuring themselves separately.
8 see annexd.s
2
