Types of liability
A5.4.20 Public sector organisations may take on liabilities by:
+ issuing specific guarantees, usually of loans;
+ writing a letter or statement of comfort; or
+ providing indemnities.
A5.4.21 Itis important to remember that any of these instruments issued by a
minister may be legally enforceable.
A5.4.22 Guarantees should normally arise using statutory powers. They typically
involve guarantees against non-payment of debts to third parties.
A5.4.23 Letters of comfort, however vague, give rise to moral and sometimes legal
obligations. They should therefore be treated in the same way as any other proposal
for a liability. Great care should be taken with proposals to offer general statements
of awareness of a third party's position, or oral statements with equivalent effect.
Creditors could easily take these to mean more than intended and threats of legal
action could result. Treasury approval is essential.
A5.4.24 It is common to give certain kinds of indemnity to members of boards of
central government departments or of NDPBs; or to civil servants involved in legal
proceedings or formal enquiries as a consequence of their employment, perhaps by
acting as a board member of a company. The standard form is set out in box
A.5.4B, in line with the Civil Service Management Code2. This cover is comparable to
what is obtainable on the commercial insurance market. So it excludes personal
criminal liability, reckless acts or business done in bad faith.
A5.4.25 Liabilities of this kind to individuals do not normally need to be reported to
parliament unless they go beyond the standard form or are particularly large or
risky.
Box A5.48: standard indemnity for board members
The government has indicated that an individual board member who has acted honestly and in good
faith will not have to meet out of his or her personal resources any personal civil liability, including
costs, which is incurred in the execution or the purported execution of his or her board functions, save
where the board member has acted recklessly.
2 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civi- servants-terms-and-conditions
147
