Asset Sales
A4.15.11 When undertaking an asset sale, departments should follow the Asset Sales Disclosure
Guidance. The guidance requires government departments to disclose the impacts of an asset
sale on Public Sector Net Borrowing (PSNB), Public Sector Net Debt (PSND), Public Sector Net
Financial Liabilities (PSNFL) and Public Sector Net Liabilities (PSNL), as well as disclosing the
proceeds and whether the sale was above, within or below the retention value range.
Departments should also include a rationale for the sale, as well as justification for its format
and timing, and include these alongside the impacts in a Written Ministerial Statement laid in
Parliament after the sale.
Transfer of property
A4.15.12 Public sector organisations may transfer property among themselves without placing
the asset on the open market, provided they do so at market prices and in appropriate
circumstances. They should follow the guidelines in box A4.15C.
Box A4.15C: protocol for transfers of assets
+ Consult ePIMS to see if properties on the civil estate can be used.
* Value assets at market prices using Royal Institute Chartered Surveyors’ Red Book (www.rics.org).
+ The original and prospective owners should work collaboratively to agree a price. It is good
practice to commission a single independent valuation to settle the price to be paid.
+ The organisations should take legal advice, especially where sponsored organisations are involved
as these may have specific legal requirements.
+ There is no need for full investigation of legal title since full transfer is rarely necessary because of
the indivisibility of the Crown.
+ Consult the Government Property Unit of the Cabinet Office, who may be able to help with
coordination.
* The terms of transfer should not normally involve neither clawback (rights to share disposal
proceeds) or overage (rights to share future profits on disposal) though see A4.15.13 below.
A4.15.13 Sometimes transfers of assets result from machinery of government changes. The
relevant legislation (eg a transfer of functions order) should prescribe the terms of any such
transfers.
A4.15.14 In certain limited circumstances overage provisions can be considered. The
circumstances where overage is acceptable are:
+ where the property is sold to a private developer for housing development;
+ theres a realistic prospect that selling will improve the outcome for housing policy,
e.g. by creating an aggregated composite site;
+ the accounting officers of the relevant public sector organisations are convinced
that, in this transaction, overage offers value for money for the Exchequer as a
whole; and
+ the Treasury agrees (these transaction are always novel and contentious).
131
