7.11 Innovative structures
7.11.1 Sometimes central government departments have objectives which more
easily fit into bespoke structures suited to the business in hand, or to longer range
plans for the future of the business. Such structures might, for example, include
various types of mutual or partnership.
7.11.2 Proposals of this kind are by definition novel and thus require explicit
Treasury consent. In each case, proposals are judged on their merits against the
standard public sector principles after examining the alternatives, taking account of
any relevant experience. The Treasury will always need to understand why one of the
existing structures will not serve: eg the NDPB format has considerable elasticity in
practice. Boxes 4.8 and 7.2 may help with this analysis.
7.12 Outsourcing
7.12.1 Public sector organisations often find it satisfactory and cost effective to
outsource some services or functions rather than provide them internally. Candidates
have included cleaning, security, catering and IT support. A wider range of services
is potentially suitable for this treatment. Innovative approaches should be explored
constructively.
7.12.2 The first step in setting up any outsourcing agreement should be to specify
the service(s) to be provided and the length of contract to be sought. At that stage
itis usually desirable to draw up an outline business case to help evaluate whether
outsourcing makes financial and operational sense. Any decision to outsource
should then be made to achieve value for money for the Exchequer as a whole.
7.12.3 Itis good practice to arrange some form of competition for all outsourcing,
as for other kinds of procurement. If services are likely to be required at short notice
- for example legal services for advice on opportunities, threats or other business
pressures which emerge with little warning - it is good practice to arrange a
competition to establish a standing panel of providers whose members can be called
upon to deal with rapidly emerging needs.
7.12.4 Contracting out does not dissolve responsibility. Public sector organisations
using a contractor should set in place systems to track and manage performance
under the contract. It may be appropriate to plan for penalties for disruption and/or
failure if the contractor cannot deliver. The PAC may need to be satisfied that the
arrangements for contracting out entail sufficient accountability for the use of public
funds.
7.13 Private finance
7.13.1 Where properly constructed and managed, public sector organisations can
use private finance arrangements to construct assets and/or deliver services with
good value for money. Structured arrangements where the private sector puts its
own funds at risk can help deliver projects on time and within budget.
7.13.2 Itis important to carry out a rigorous value for money analysis to determine
whether these benefits are likely to exceed the additional cost of using private
finance. Contracting organisations should also make sure that they are able to
afford such arrangements over their working lifetimes, taking account, as far
54
