Box 5.1: contingent liabilities: notifying parliament

* Parliament should be notified of uncertain liabilities in a meaningful way without
spurious accuracy. This should be done by Ministerial Statement and departmental
Minutes to the House of Commons, drawn directly to the attention of the chairs of the
PAC and relevant departmental committee.

* If a contingent liability affects several departments but cannot confidently be allocated
among them, the relevant ministers should inform parliament in a pragmatic way. A
single statement may well suffice.

* If, exceptionally, a new liability needs to remain confidential, the minister should inform
the chairs of the relevant select committee and the PAC; then inform parliament openly
when the need for confidentiality lifts.

* Ministers should inform parliament if an ALB assumes a contingent liability which it
could not absorb within its own resources, since the risk ultimately lies with the sponsor
department's budget.

5.5.4 The general rule is to err on the side of caution in keeping parliament
informed of emerging contingent liabilities. It is impossible to generalise about every
possible set of circumstances but some guidance is in box 5.1.
5.6 Tax
5.6.1 Public sector organisations should not engage in, or connive at, tax evasion,
tax avoidance or tax planning. If a public sector organisation were to obtain
financial advantage by moderating the tax paid by a contractor, supplier or other
counterparty, it would usually mean that the Exchequer as a whole would be worse
off — thus conflicting with the accounting officer's duties (section 3.3). Thus artificial
tax avoidance schemes should normally be rejected. It should be standard practice
to consult HMRC!4 about transactions involving non-standard approaches to tax
before going ahead.
5.6.2 There is of course no problem with using tax advisers to help meet normal
legitimate requirements of carrying on public business. These include administration
of VAT, PAYE and NICs, where expert help can be useful and efficient.
5.6.3 Proposals to create new taxes in order to assign their proceeds to new
spending proposals are rarely acceptable. Decisions on tax are for Treasury
ministers, who are reluctant to compromise their future fiscal freedom to make
decisions.
5.7 Public dividend capital
5.7.1 Certain public sector businesses, notably trading funds and certain Health
Trusts, are set up with public dividend capital (PDC) in lieu of equity. Like equity,
PDC should be serviced, though not necessarily at a constant rate.
5.7.2 PDC is not a soft option. In view of the risk it carries, it should deliver a rate of
return comparable to commercial equity investments carrying a similar level of risk.
There is scope for the return to vary to reflect market conditions and investment
14 HMRC customer relationship manager or customer co-ordinator

36
