Annex 4.15
Each public sector organisation is expected to develop and operate an asset management strategy
underpinned by a reliable and up to date asset register. The board should review the strategy annually
as part of the corporate or business plan.
A4.15.1 A4.15.1 Accounting officers of public sector organisations are responsible
for managing their assets. This aspect of financial management covers the
acquisition, use, maintenance, and disposal of assets for the benefit of the
organisations and indeed for the Exchequer as whole.
A4.15.2 Each organisation needs to have a clear grasp of:
. the content of its current assets base;
. the assets it needs to deliver efficient, cost effective public services;
. what this means for asset acquisition, use, maintenance, renewal, upgrade
and disposal;
. whether any gains could be achieved by working with other public sector
organisations;
. how use of assets fits within the corporate plan.
A4.15.3 A4.15.3 Normally, these responsibilities will be dispersed in an organisation
through a system of delegations with appropriate reporting arrangements. Similarly,
departments should ensure that each of their sponsored organisations has
equivalent arrangements.
Asset registers
A4.15.4 A4.15.4 It is good practice for each organisation to draw up, and keep up
to date, a register of all the assets it owns and uses. This will usually be needed for
preparation of its financial accounts. It is also essential to undertake regular stock
taking of the organisations current assets base and thus for planning change.
A4.15.5 The assets on an organisation's register should include both tangible and
intangible assets, covering both owned assets and assets under its legal control
such as leased or private finance assets. Box A.4.15A lists the main groups of
assets but is not exhaustive. Each organisation should decide on a meaningful
valuation threshold in line with best practice.
A4.15.6 In drawing up the asset register, particular care should be taken with two
sorts of asset:
. attractive items, such as works of art and items similarly susceptible to
theft. These may be included even if they are below the valuation threshold, in
line with guidance provided by the Government Art Collection; and
128
