Duration of charge

A5.2.7 It can make sense to relate the funder’s right to clawback to the policy
objectives of making the grant rather than allowing it to persist indefinitely
unchanged. Some policy options are outlined in box A5.2C. If the clawback is linked
to the value of an asset which is likely to appreciate, there is a risk that the recipient
may face a disincentive to participate, so care and sensitivity may be needed.

A5.2.8 However, it can also make sense to moderate grants conditions by using
terms such as:

«a break clause allowing the funder and recipient to consider whether
the objectives of the funding have been achieved, triggering the end or
reduction of the funder’s interest in the asset;

«a review clause allowing scope to retain the charge and review the
clawback period if the project has not met the agreed objectives;

«releasing the funder’s interest in the asset (and so permitting its
disposal or use as collateral) at the end of the agreed charge or
clawback period.

Box A5.2C: options for clawback duration or assets as collateral

* keying it to the objectives of the grant

* relating it to the period over which the intended benefits are to be delivered

«settling clawback rights on a declining scale, eg falling to zero by the end of an agreed
period, or the

asset's useful life, or by when the policy objectives are deemed delivered

«allowing the recipient to use as collateral the difference between the market value of
the asset and the original grant
A5.2.9 It is common to prohibit recipients from using the assets they acquire or
improve using grants as collateral in borrowing transactions. This is because the
public sector funder might be forced to take up the recipient's legal liability to
service debt should it fail. However, if a funder agrees that a recipient may use
assets acquired or developed with grants as collateral, it should consider carefully
what conditions it should apply. Some freedom of this kind may help the recipient
make the transition to viability or independence. For example, a funder might allow
a recipient to retain income generated by using spare capacity in the funded asset.
A5.2.10 But normally it is important for the funder to retain some control over any
use of the funded asset outside the grant conditions. Typically the funder will
require the recipient to obtain the funder’s consent before raising funds on any part
of a funded asset so long as the clawback period continues. Any further conditions
should be proportionate, striking a proper balance between encouraging the
recipient to be self-supporting and allowing the recipient to use public funds for its
own purpose.
Enforcing a claim on a funded asset
A5.2.11 Where appropriate, funders should secure a formal legal charge on funded
assets. This may be particularly important for high risk projects or to prevent the
139
