depending on the net position reached after balancing outflows to finance
expenditure against inflows from taxes and other sources.
5.11.2 So there is considerable advantage to be gained for the Exchequer as a
whole by minimising this net position. In practice this means gathering balances
together at the end of each working day. In aggregate all these accounts make up
the Exchequer Pyramid, managed by the Treasury. Most funds are held with the
Government Banking Service.
5.11.3 It is essential for central government organisations to minimise the balances
in their own accounts with commercial banks. Were each to retain a significant sum
in its own account with such banks, the amount of net government borrowing
outstanding on any given day would be appreciably higher, adding to interest costs
and hence worsening the fiscal balance.
5.11.4 Each central government organisation should establish a policy for its use of
banking services. See annex 5.6 for guidance. Sponsor departments should also
make sure that their ALBs are aware of the importance of managing this aspect of
their business efficiently and effectively (see box 7.2).
5.12 Other financing techniques
5.12.1 Depending on its circumstances, purposes and risk profile, a public sector
organisation may consider using financial instruments provided by the commercial
markets. Among these techniques are foreign currency transactions and various
hedging instruments designed to control or limit business risks, for example those
arising out of known requirements for specific future purchases of market priced
commodities. Mundane possibilities are use of credit or debit cards, in order to
secure faster settlements.
5.12.2 As with making decisions about other policies and projects, an organisation
considering using unfamiliar financing techniques should evaluate them carefully,
especially to assess value for money. The checklists in boxes 4.5 and 4.6 have
reminders of factors that may need to be considered. As such transaction(s) are
almost always novel, contentious or repercussive, it is essential to consult the
Treasury.
5.12.3 Any organisation using a new or non-standard technique should ensure that
it has the competence to manage, control and track its use and any resulting
financial exposures, which may vary with time. In particular, departments should
consult the Treasury before using derivatives for the first time (and ALBs their
sponsoring departments).
5.12.4 When assessing an unfamiliar financing technique, it is important to
remember that providers of finance and complex financial instruments intend to
profit from their business. And providers’ costs of finance are always inferior to the
UK government's cost of borrowing. So it is usually right to be cautious about any
novel techniques. The Treasury will always refuse proposals to speculate. Offers
which appear too good to be true usually are.
5.12.5 As with managing other business, parliament may ask accounting officers to
justify any decisions about use of financial transactions, especially if with hindsight
they have not achieved good value for money.

39
