The remedies available
A4.14.5 Remedies can take a variety of forms, including (alone or in combination):
+ an apology;
«an explanation;
+ correction of the error or other remedial action;
«an undertaking to improve procedures or systems; or
+ financial payments, eg one off or as part of a structured settlement.
A4.14.6 Financial remedies for individual cases are normally ex gratia payments.
Where a pattern develops, and a number of cases raising similar points need to be
dealt with, it may make sense to develop an extra statutory scheme (see annex
4.13). If any such scheme seems likely to persist, the organisation concerned should
consider whether to bring forward legislation to set it on a statutory footing (see
sections 2.5 and 2.6).
Designing remedies
A4.14.7 The normal approach to complaints where no financial payment is called
for is to offer an apology and an explanation. This may be a sufficient and
appropriate response in itself. People complaining may also want reassurance that
mistakes will not be repeated.
A4.14.8 It may be more difficult to judge whether financial compensation is called
for, and if so how much, especially if there is no measurable financial detriment.
Great care should be taken in designing financial compensation schemes since they
may set expensive precedents.
A4.14.9 Where financial remedies are identified as the right approach to service
failure, they should be fair, reasonable and proportionate to the damage suffered by
those complaining. Financial remedies should not, however, allow recipients to gain
a financial advantage compared to what would have happened with no service
failure. Consideration should always be given by the public sector organisation that
the circumstances of a complaint do not involve bad faith on the part of the
complainant, and the possibility of fraudulent intent.
A4.14.10 Public sector organisations deciding on financial remedies should take into
account all the relevant factors. Some which are often worth considering are
outlined in box A4.14A. The list may not be exhaustive.
Box Ad.14A: factors to consider in deciding whether financial compensation is
appropriate
* Whether a loss has been caused by failure to pay an entitlement, eg to a grant or
benefit.
* Whether someone has faced any additional costs as a result of the action or inaction of
a public sector organisation, eg because of delay.
* Whether the process of making the complaint has imposed costs on the person
complaining, eg lost earnings or costs of pursuing the complaint.
125
