¢ donations by departments
«transfers of land and buildings, or assignment of leases, to private sector bodies at less
than market price (the gift is valued at the difference between the price agreed and the
market price).

Approval

A4.12.3 Treasury approval is needed for all gifts valued at more than £300,000,

and any other gifts not covered by a department's or ALB's delegated authorities.

ALBs should consult their sponsor departments about gifts.

A4.12.4 The WMS and minute must then be laid before the House of Commons, on

the same day, at least fourteen parliamentary sitting days before the department

proposes to make the gift. In cases of special urgency, it is permissible,

exceptionally, for all or part of the fourteen day notice period to fall during an

adjournment or recess, or for a shorter notice period to be given. In such cases, with

Treasury approval, the reasons for urgency should be explained.

A4.12.5 The WMS and minute must contain the standard opening and closing

paragraphs in box A4.12B. These terms have the PAC's endorsement and can be

changed only with Treasury approval.
Box A4.128: standard paragraphs for written ministerial statement and departmental
minute
Opening paragraph:
It is the normal practice when a government department proposes to make a gift of a value exceeding
£300,000, for the department concerned to present to the House of Commons a minute giving
particulars of the gift and explaining the circumstances; and to refrain from making the gift until
fourteen parliamentary sitting days after the issue of the minute, except in cases of special urgency.
Closing paragraph:
The Treasury has approved the proposal in principle. If, during the period of fourteen parliamentary
sitting days beginning on the date on which this minute was laid before the House of Commons, a
Member signifies an objection by giving notice of a Parliamentary Question or a Motion relating to the
minute, or by otherwise raising the matter in the House, final approval of the gift will be withheld
pending an examination of the objection.

A4.12.6 The WMS and minute should also set out briefly the nature of the gift, its

value, the circumstances in which it is being given, and the recipient. Where the gift

is to be replaced, information about the cost and nature of the replacement, when

it is expected to be acquired, and the Estimate to which the expenditure will be

charged should be included. In the case of non-voted expenditure, the account to

which the replacement cost will be charged should be quoted.

Parliamentary objections

A4.12.7 Members of Parliament may object to gifts by letter, Parliamentary Question

or through an Early Day Motion. In such cases, departments may wish to advise

their ministers to take the initiative by making contact with the MP concerned. This

17
