assets from the time of receipt and against claims by third parties including its own
employees. An indemnity by the borrower is an acceptable substitute if the lender is
satisfied that the borrower could and would meet any damage or other loss.
A4.4.19 Public sector organisations are usually expected to meet the cost of insuring
any government assets (eg. equipment or stores) held by a contractor in the normal
course of business. The cost of any insurance against risks arising from negligence or
wilful misconduct by the contractor's employees should be borne by the contractor.
These arrangements should be explicitly set out in the relevant contract.
A4.4.20 Public sector organisations which borrow objects of value from a non-
government body should normally offer the owner an indemnity against damage or
loss. Such indemnities should leave no doubt as to the extent and duration of the
borrowing organisation's liability. And they may need to be reported if they fall
within the parliamentary reporting requirements (see annex 5.4).
A4.4.21 Borrowers should only take out commercial insurance for loaned items of
value if the owner insists upon it, or if the borrower has reason to believe that
commercial insurance would be more cost effective than giving an indemnity.
Employers’ liability
A4.4.22 The Crown is not bound by the Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance)
Act 1969. So departments need not insure the risks outlined in the Act. Decisions on
whether to insure should be taken on value for money grounds after an appraisal.
Similarly, parliamentary bodies such as the National Audit Office, the Parliamentary
Commissioner (Ombudsman) and the Independent Parliamentary Standards
Authority need not insure against employers’ liability risks as they are exempted
under the Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) (Amendment) Regulations
2011 (S12011/686).
A4.4.23 A body funded by grant in aid need not insure against employers’ liability
risks. This is because the Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Regulations
1998 (SI 1998/2573) provide exemption for any body (or person who may be an
employer) holding a certificate issued by a government department. Again, the
decision on whether to insure will depend on a value for money assessment. If the
organisation chooses not to insure, responsibility for the issue of certificates in
accordance with the Act rests with the department responsible for paying grant in
aid, provided that it is satisfied that this is the appropriate course.
A4.4.24 The scope of the certificate should be strictly confined to the risks with
which the Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 is concerned, and
may not be extended to any other risks. It should be in the form set out in Box
A4.4E. Departments should ensure that the circumstances in which certificates have
been issued are reviewed from time to time, so that certificates may be revoked if
circumstances change.

Box: 4.4.E: form of exemption certificate

In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 of the Employers’ Liability

(Compulsory Insurance) Regulations 1998 (SI 1998/2573), the Minister of ......./Secretary of State

for....... hereby certifies that any claim established against [here specify the body or person] in

respect of any liability to [here specify the employees involved] of the kind mentioned in section

2
