Annex 1.1
The Comptroller and Auditor
General

the independent auditor of nearly all central government institutions. Using extensive statutory rights

of access to records, the C&AG provides direct advice and assurance to Parliament.
A1.1.1 The C&AG is an officer of the House of Commons appointed by The Queen.
They are responsible for the audit of most central government institutions. This work
is carried out under his or her direction by NAO staff (see www.nao.org.uk) or by
contracting out. NAO is in the public sector but independent of central government.
A1.1.2 The C&AG is appointed for a single non-renewable term of ten years; and
can only be removed from office by The Queen on an address of both Houses of
Parliament. The NAO's statutory board advises and supports the C&AG — for
example, on the NAO's strategic direction and the associated resource requirements.
Audit related decisions such as which examinations to perform and the specific audit
and reporting approach, are matters solely for the independent C&AG to decide.
A1.1.3 The NAO is financed by an Estimate submitted jointly by the C&AG and the
NAO chair to the Public Accounts Commission (TPAC), a committee of the House of
Commons. NAQ's expenditure may include discretionary activities permitted under
statute if approved by NAO's board and subsequently by TPAC through its scrutiny
of the NAO's Estimate.
Audit
A1.1.4 In order to carry out financial audit work, the CRAG has extensive statutory
rights of access to information held by a wide range of public sector organisations.
This material is also required to compile Whole of Government Accounts, and
extends to the records of many contractors and recipients of grants. The C&AG also
has a right to obtain information about, and explanations of, any of this evidence.
A1.1.5 The C&AG is responsible for the financial audit of virtually all central
government organisations, providing an audit opinion on their annual financial and
reporting to Parliament. The C&AG may be appointed the auditor of government
companies as a requirement of statute or on an ‘agreement’ basis with an individual
entity as necessary. Financial audits are carried out in accordance with International
Standards on Auditing (UK and Ireland).
A1.1.6 In addition, the C&AG may carry out audits of particular areas of central
government expenditure to establish whether public funds have been used
economically, efficiently and effectively. Selection of these value for money (vfm)
examinations - having taken account of any proposals made by the Committee of

57
