supplying a missing licence) or, in more serious cases, financial payments. Decisions
about financial remedies — which should not be offered routinely - should include
taking account of the legal rights of the other party or parties and the impact on the
organisation's future business.
4.11.5 Any such payments, whether statutory or ex gratia, should follow good
practice (see section 4.13). Since schemes of financial redress often set precedents
or have implications elsewhere, they should be cleared with the Treasury before
commitments are made, just as with any other public expenditure out of the normal
pattern (see sections 2.1 to 2.4).
4.12 Complaints
4.12.1 Those public sector organisations which deal with customers directly should
strive to achieve clear, accurate and reliable standards for the products and services
they provide. It is good practice to arrange for complaints about performance to be
reviewed by an independent organisation such as an ombudsman.
4.12.2 Often such review processes are statutory. The activities of central
government departments and the NHS are open to review by the PHSO?, whose
Principles of Good Complaints Handling’0 sets out generic advice on complaints
handling and administration of redress (see also annex 4.14). After investigation of
cases of specific complaint, the PHSO can rule on whether injustice or hardship can
be attributed to maladministration or service failure, and may recommend remedies,
either for individual cases or for groups of similar cases. If departments decline to
follow the PHSO's advice, they should lay a memorandum in parliament explaining
why.
4.13 Transparency
4.13.1 All public sector organisations should operate as openly as is compatible with
the requirements of their business. In line with the statutory public rights't, they
should make available timely information about their services, standards and
performance. This material should strike a careful balance between protecting
confidentiality and open disclosure in the public interest.
4.13.2 All public sector organisations should adopt a publication scheme routinely
offering information about the organisation's activities. They should also publish
regular information about their plans, performance and use of public resources.
4.13.3 The published information should be in sufficient detail, and be sufficiently
regular, to enable users and other stakeholders to hold the organisation and its
ministers to account. Benchmarks can help local users to evaluate local performance
more easily.
4.13.4 The primary document of record for central government departments is the
report and accounts, which should consolidate information about the relevant ALBs.
It should include a governance statement (see annex 3.1).
9 httpy/www ombudsman org uk
10 ito: jwawaw. ombudsman, org uk/improving-public service/ombudsmansprinciples
11 Eg Freedom of information act 2000, Data protection act 1998, Environment information regulations 2004 and the Re-use of

public sector information regulations 2005

30
