+ an assessment of the value for money of the case

«any non-financial aspects;

«whether the case in question could have wider impact.

Severance Payments

A4.13.9 Special severance payments when staff leave public service employment
should be exceptional. They always require Treasury approval because they are
usually novel, contentious and potentially repercussive. So departments should
always consult the Treasury in advance when considering a special severance
payment.

A4.13.10 The Treasury adopts a sceptical approach to proposals for special
severance settlements, in particular:

«precedents from other parts of the public sector may not be a reliable
guide in any given case;

«legal advice that a particular severance payment appears to offer good
value for the employer may not be conclusive since such advice may not
take account of the wider public interest;

«even if the cost of defeating an apparently frivolous or vexatious appeal
will exceed the likely cost of that particular settlement to the employer,
it may still be desirable to take the case to formal proceeding;

«winning such cases demonstrates that the government does not reward
failure and should enhance the employer's reputation for prudent use
of public funds.

Severance payments will only be approved where they provide value for

money for the Exchequer as a whole, rather than simply for the body

concerned.
A4.13.11 Departments should not treat special severance as a soft option, eg to
avoid management action, disciplinary processes, unwelcome publicity or
reputational damage. Box A4.13B sets out the factors the Treasury needs to evaluate
in dealing with special severance cases.
A4.13.12 It is important to ensure that Treasury approval is sought before any
offers, whether oral or in writing, are made. A proforma for seeking Treasury
approval is available’.
A4.13.13 Departments and their ALBs are also required to seek ministerial approval
(including the approval of the Minister for the Cabinet Office) of confidentiality
clauses in certain circumstances. Cabinet Office guidance on the use and approval of
such agreements is also available2.
1 hitps Awww gov.uk/government/publications/managing-public-money
2 htps://www.gov.uk/governmenpublications/civikservice:settlement-agreements-special-severance-payments-and-confidentialty
clauses
121
