Funding

This chapter explores the means by which central government organisations may obtain funds in

order to finance public expenditure. The Treasury operates disciplines to respect parliament's concern

to prevent unauthorised expenditure.
5.1.1 Most public expenditure is financed from centrally agreed multi-year budgets
administered by the Treasury, which oversees departments use of their budget
allocations. In the main, departments have considerable discretion about how they
distribute these budget allocations, which are expressed net of relevant income. The
main source of receipts to be netted off is fees and charges (see chapter 6).
5.1.2 The Treasury oversees and directs the rules that departments should respect in
managing their budgets. Departments are expected to live within their allocations
for each financial year, with some limited exceptions, eg for certain demand led
services. The budgeting framework is explained in the Consolidated Budgeting
Guidance, which is refreshed each year.
5.2 Grants
5.2.1 Each central government department decides how much of its budget
provision it should cascade to its ALBs in each year of the multi-year agreement.
Departments may pay them grants (for specific purposes) and grants-in-aid
(unspecific support) to finance their spending; though it is the net spending of the
ALB that scores in the departmental budget. Annex 5.1 explains more about grants.
5.2.2 Budgets and Estimates plan net spending and include all spending of ALBs
however it is financed. In general it is sensible to consider arrangements for
protecting the Exchequer interest through clawback of specific grants should the
purposes for which they are agreed not materialise (annex 5.2).
5.3 Estimates
5.3.1 The multiyear departmental budgets agreed collectively among ministers do
not of themselves confer authority to spend or commit resources. Parliamentary
agreement, usually through the Supply Estimate process, is also essential (see box
2.1).
5.3.2 Departmental Estimates are put to parliament covering one financial year at a
time, in the spring. Each covers the net expenditure of a department and its ALBs (ie
all spending in budgets and any voted spend outside of budgets). For the year
ahead, the provision sought should be taut and realistic, without padding. The
Supply and Estimates Guidance Manual has more detail.

33
