e how far the payment depended on changes in the recipient's
circumstances of which he or she was obliged to tell the payer;
e the extent to which generic information was readily available to help
recipients understand what was likely to be due.

Fraud
A4.11.9 If a public sector organisation is satisfied that the circumstances of an
overpayment involved bad faith on the part of the recipient, it should automatically
consider the possibility of fraud in addition to recovery action. For example, the
recipient may have dishonestly given false information or knowingly failed to
disclose information. If there is evidence of fraudulent intent, prosecution or
disciplinary action should be undertaken where appropriate and practicable. A
criminal conviction in such a case will not eliminate the public debt which had
resulted from the overpayment, and so recovery of the debt should also be pursued
by any available means.
Cost-effectiveness
A4.11.10 Public sector organisations should take decisions about their tactics in
seeking recovery in particular cases on the strength of cost benefit analysis of the
options. Decisions not to pursue recovery should be exceptional and taken only after
careful appraisal of the relevant facts, taking into account the legal position. The
option of abating future payments to the recipient should always be considered.
Defences against recovery
A4.11.11 Defences which may be claimed against recovery include:

e the length of time since the overpayment was made

e change of position

e estoppel

e good consideration

e hardship.
Lapse of time
A4.11.12 There can be time limitations on recovery. In England and Wales, a
recipient might plead that a claim is time-barred under the provisions of the
Limitation Acts. Proceedings to recover overpayments must generally be instituted
within six years (twelve years if the claim is against the personal estate of a deceased
person) of discovery of the mistake or the time when the claimant could, with
reasonable diligence, have discovered it.
A4.11.13 When public sector organisations claim against a private sector
organisation or people who ignore or dispute the claim, the organisation should
take legal advice about proceeding with the claim in good time so that it does not
become time barred.
A4.11.14 If someone claims that they have overpaid a public sector organisation,
they should be told promptly if the claim is time barred. But if, on its merits, the

13
