patterns; but persistent underperformance against the agreed rate of return should
not be tolerated.
5.7.3 A department needs specific statutory power to issue PDC, together with
supply cover to pay it out of the Consolidated Fund. Sometimes instead of a specific
issue of PDC, the legislation establishing (or financially reconstructing) a public
sector business deems an issue of PDC to the new business. Dividends on PDC, and
any repayments of PDC, are paid to the sponsor department of the business.
5.7.4 Further information about the use of PDC can be found in Consolidated
Budgeting guidance.'s
5.8 Borrowing by public sector organisations
5.8.1 Some public sector organisations, eg certain trading funds, are partly financed
through loans provided through the sponsor department's Estimate; or from the
National Loans Fund (NLF). In these cases Treasury consent and specific legal powers
are always required. Limits and other conditions are common. See annex 5.5 for
more.
5.8.2 NLF and Voted loans can only be made if there is reasonable expectation that
the loan will be serviced and repaid promptly. Similarly, when ALBs borrow, their
sponsor departments explicitly stand behind them and so should scrutinise
borrowers’ creditworthiness, not just relying on their track records, in order to satisfy
themselves that such loans are sound. For NLF loans, if timely repayment could not
realistically be expected, the loan would be unlawful.
5.8.3 Should a department become aware of concerns about the security of
outstanding loans (either its own or an ALB's), it should warn the Treasury promptly
and consider what action it can take to reduce or otherwise mitigate any potential
loss. If a loan becomes irrecoverable, remedial treatment should be agreed with the
Treasury and then notified to parliament.
5.8.4 The NLF cannot make a loss. So the interest rates charged on NLF loans,
whether fixed or variable, must be higher than the rates at which the NLF could raise
funds for a similar period. Early repayment is sometimes possible, eg if the borrower
has windfall receipts, but never simply to refinance on terms more favourable to the
borrower because a fee is charged to match the Exchequer costs when a loan ends
early. This is because the NLF finances the amount outstanding using money market
instruments sold at the time the loan was made, and must continue to service those
instruments. So the Exchequer as a whole would make a loss if the NLF offered
cheaper replacement loans.
5.8.5 While NLF loans are repaid to the NLF, voted loans are repaid to the
Consolidated Fund. The treatment of repayments and interest payments in Estimates
and accounts is discussed in the Consolidated Budgeting Guidance, the Estimate
Manual and the FReM. The Treasury accounts for NLF transactions in the NLF's
accounts. Any proposed write-offs must be notified to parliament after obtaining
Treasury agreement: see annex 5.5
15 hitps:/jwww gov.uklgovernment/publications/consolidated- budgeting-guidance-2021-10-2022

37
