Payments outside the normal pattern

A4.8.5 Payments in advance of need should be exceptional, and should only be
considered if a good value for money case for the Exchequer can be made. Even
then, as advance payments lead to higher Exchequer financing costs, such payments
are novel and contentious and require specific Treasury approval. Advance payment
should never be used to circumvent expenditure controls or budgetary limits.

A4.8.6 In particular, it is not good value for money for public sector organisations to
act as a source of finance to contractors who have access to other forms of loan
finance. So advance payments to contractors (ie payments made before equivalent
value is received in return) should only be considered if, for example, a price
discount commensurate with the time value of the funds in question can provide a
good value for money case. Exceptions to these guidelines, which would not
normally require specific Treasury approval, include:

«service and maintenance contracts which require payment when the
contract commences, provided that the service is available and can be
called on from the date of payment;

+ grants to small voluntary or community bodies where the recipient
needs working capital to carry out the commitment for which the grant
is paid and private sector finance would reduce value for money;

«minor services such as training courses, conference bookings or
magazine subscriptions, where local discretion is acceptable; and

«prepayments up to a modest limit agreed with the Treasury, where a
value for money assessment demonstrates clear advantage in early
payment.

A4.8.7 Interim payments may have an element of prepayment and so public sector
organisations should consider them carefully before agreeing to them. However, if
they are genuinely linked to work completed or physical progress satisfactorily
achieved, preferably as defined under a contract, they may represent acceptable
value for public funds. Taking legal advice as necessary, organisations should,
however, consider whether:

+ the contractor's reduced need for working capital should be reflected in
reduced prices;

«the contractor should provide a performance bond in the form of a
bank guarantee to deal with possible breach of contract.

A4.8.8 Public sector organisations should not, however, use interim payments to
circumvent public spending controls. For example, it is not acceptable to make
payments where value has not been received, simply to avoid underspending.
A4.8.9 Deferred payments are generally not good practice. They normally mean
paying more to compensate the contractor for higher financing costs and are thus
poor value for money (at the margin the Exchequer can always borrow more cheaply
than the private sector). So any proposal for deliberate late payment is potentially
novel and contentious. Any central government organisation considering deferred
payments must thus seek Treasury approval before proceeding.

101
