1.3 Parliament

1.3.1 Parliament approves the legislation which empowers ministers to carry out
their policies. It also allows finance for services when it approves each year's
Estimates. See the Estimates Manual? for more.

1.3.2 From time to time parliament may examine government activity. Select
committees examine policies, expenditure, administration and service delivery in
defined areas. The Committee of Public Accounts (PAC - see section 3.5) examines
financial accounts, scrutinises value for money and generally holds the government
and its public servants to account for the quality of their past administration.

1.4 The Treasury

1.4.1 Parliament looks to the Treasury to make sure that:

+ departments use their powers only as it has intended; and

«revenue is raised, and the resources so raised spent, only within the
agreed limits.

1.4.2 Hence it falls to the Treasury to:

+ set the ground rules for the administration of public money; and

+ account to parliament for doing so.

1.4.3 This document sets out how the Treasury seeks to meet these parliamentary
expectations. The key requirements are regularity, propriety, value for money and
feasibility (see box 3.2). The Treasury:

«designs and runs the financial planning system and oversees the
operation of the agreed multiyear budgets to meet ministers’ fiscal
policy objectives;

+ oversees the operation of the Estimates through which departments
obtain authority to spend year by year;

+ sets the standards to which central government organisations publish
annual reports and accounts in the Financial Reporting Manual (FReM).
This adapts International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) to take
account of the public sector context;

+ sets Accounts Directions for the different kinds of central government
organisations whose accounts are laid in parliament; and

+ may also work through the Cabinet Office to set certain standards
applicable across central government, for example functional
standardss.

3 hittps:/www. gov. uk/aovernment/publications/supply-estimates-quidance-manual
4 See the Consolidated Budgeting Guidance for more - https/iwww.gov.uk/government/publications/consolidated-budgeting-
quidance
5 See Functional Standards - GOV.UK (wwiw.gov.uk)
4
