* ensure that there is sufficient skills capacity in undertaking and managing procurements

and projects.

Review

* apply the Gateway™ review process;

* draw issues which may have wider implications to the Cabinet Office's attention.
A4.6.2 This guidance is intended to be fully consistent with the UK's international obligations. It
does not create any rights or legal obligations.

Value for money

A4.6.3 Value for money is a key concept (see paragraph 3.3.3 and box A4.6B). It means
securing the best mix of quality and effectiveness for the least outlay over the period of use of
the goods or services bought. It is not about minimising up front prices. Whether in
conventional procurement, market testing, private finance or some other form of public private
partnership, finding value for money involves an appropriate allocation of risk.

Box A4.6B: securing value for money

Cost: the key factor is whole life cost, not lowest purchase price. Whole life cost takes into account

the cost over time, including capital, maintenance, management, operating and disposal costs. For

complex procurements, whole-life cost can be very different from initial price.

Quality: paying more for higher quality may be justified if the whole life cost is better, for example,

taking into account maintenance costs, useful life and residual value. The purchaser should determine

whether increased benefits justify higher costs.

Perspective: each public sector organisation's procurement strategy should seek to achieve the best

value outcome for the Exchequer as a whole, not just for the organisation itself. This should be

designed in before the invitation to tender is published.

Collaborative procurement: in the vast majority of cases, standardising and aggregating procurement

requirements will deliver better value for money. Public sector organisations, including smaller ones,

should therefore collaborate as far as possible on procurement in line with GPS practice.
A4.6.4 Purchasers need to develop clear strategies for continuing improvement in the
procedures for acquisition of goods, works and services. Public sector organisations should
collaborate with each other, following guidance, in order to secure economies of scale, unless
they can achieve better value for the Exchequer as a whole some other way. Smaller suppliers
should have fair access to see if they able to deliver better value for money.
Legal framework
A4.6.5 Public sector organisations are responsible for ensuring that they comply with the law on
procurement (see box A4.6C) taking account of Cabinet Office guidance2.
The user's requirement
A4.6.6 Procurement should help deliver relevant departmental and government-wide strategies
and policies. The procuring organisation should establish that the supply sought is really needed,
is likely to be cost effective and affordable. And the published specification should explain clearly
what outcomes are required, since this is crucial to obtaining the supply required. Once it is
decided that third party procurement appears better value for money than provision in-house, a
2 Cabinet Office guidance: hitps://www gov uldgovemmentiorganisations/crown-commercial-service

95
