Annex 4.3
-
Risk
opportunities and threats — suited to its business, circumstances and risk appetite. The board should
lead the assessment and management of risk, and support the accounting officer in drawing up the
governance statements (see annex 3.1).
The case for managing risk
A4.3.1 Every public sector organisations faces a variety of uncertainties, both positive and
negative, which can affect its success in delivering its objectives, budget and value
for money. So the board of each public sector organisation should actively seek to
recognise both threats and opportunities, and to decide how to respond to them,
including how to set internal controls.
A4.3.2 Managing risk should be integrated into the normal management systems of
each public sector organisation so that it can achieve its goals and maintain a
reputation of credibility and reliability. It is for each accounting officer (AQ),
supported by the board, to decide how.
A4.3.3 The board should make a strategic choice about the style, shape and quality
of risk management within each organisation. This is risk tolerance, ie the extent to
which the organisation is willing to accept loss or detriment either in the
performance of its regular services or in order to secure better outcomes. Different
risk tolerances will apply to different circumstances, eg mission critical programmes
or policies might find service failure scarcely tolerable, whereas investment bodies
may care more about achieving financial success even at the price of some failures.
Boards should be willing to take a proportionate approach so that less important
risks do not crowd out the vital ones.
Risk management in practice
A4.3.4 The board's strategic guidance on risk appetite should permeate each
organisation's programmes, policies, processes and projects. It should determine
how delegations and reporting arrangements work so that departures from plan can
be picked up and dealt with promptly.
A4.3.5 Feedback from working level should also inform each board reassessment of
risk. Thus risk management should be a continuous cycle of assessment and
feedback, responding to new information and developments. The essentials of the
process are summarised in box A4.3A.
A4.3.6 Each organisation should decide how this cycle should work, in line with its
circumstances, priorities and working practices. The final word must always be for
81
