«sums due under bespoke legislation: paid as specified, eg the proceeds of national
insurance contributions paid into the National Insurance Fund
+ receipts of trading funds: treated as specified in the founding legislation
* sums due to departments financed through Estimates:
- either paid into the Consolidated Fund as CFERs
- or applied to support spending in the Estimate if the Treasury agrees.
A5.3.5 Specific legislation, with Treasury approval, is normally required to authorise
use of income directly to meet resource consumption ie to offset current or capital
expenditure. In effect this process means that the department seeks less finance
through Estimates because part of the cost of the service is met from income.
Parliament has an interest because otherwise resource consumption would require
specific approval through the Estimates process.
A5.3.6 Following the Clear Line of Sight reforms, there is no longer a specific
control over the amount of income that can be retained by departments and used
to offset spending. However controls over income remain.
A5.3.7 In order for a department to retain income to offset against spending within
the Estimate it must be within the budget boundary (i.e. classed by the Treasury as
negative DEL or departmental AME) and be properly described in the Estimate.
There must also be a direct relationship between the income and the spending and
departments may not use additional income on one part of the Estimate to offset
shortfalls of income (or overspends) in another part of the Estimates without
Treasury approval. Such approval will only be given where the additional income has
an appropriate relationship to the expenditure it is being used to cover.
Authority to retain and use income
A5.3.8 The Treasury has powers to direct that income included in a departmental
Estimate and approved by Parliament may be retained and used by the department.
This Treasury direction is included within the introductory text to the Main Supply
Estimates publication. The direction provides that the income in the relevant
Estimate may be applied against resources (current or capital) within that Estimate.
Without such authority the cash must be surrendered to the Consolidated Fund as
extra receipts (CFERs).
A5.3.9 Sometimes departments have excess income, ie income is anticipated to be
higher than the expenditure stream it matches, or more income than was
anticipated in the Estimate. When income is anticipated to be higher than the
expenditure stream it matches departments may present an Estimate with a negative
budgetary limit at the start of the financial year, although this is relatively rare.
When more income is received than was anticipated in the Estimate, departments
are allowed to treat the income as negative DEL as long as it is no more than 10%
above the level envisaged for that year as part of the Spending Review settlement2.
Any income in excess of this will normally be treated as non-budget and will need to
be surrendered as a CFER.
1 (see Estimates Manual https:/jwww.gov uklgovernment/publications/supply-estimates-quidance-manual
2 https:/www.gov.uk/government/colections consolidate budgeting-quidance
142
EE —————————
