Annex 2.3
A2.3.1 The PAChas had long standing concerns about how the government gains authority
from Parliament for each area of spending.
A2.3.2 In the mid 19th century it became customary for governments to gain
Parliamentary authority for some areas of expenditure simply by use of the
Contingencies Fund, without troubling to obtain specific powers for them. Shortly
after its formation in 1862, the PAC protested about this practice, partly because it
involved less stringent audit. It urged that the Contingencies Fund should be used
only for in-year funding of pressing needs, and that all continuing and other
substantive spending should be submitted to the Estimates process with due
itemisation.
A2.3.3 By 1885 the PAC had become concerned that the authority of the Estimate
and its successor Appropriation Act was not really sufficient either:
“... cannot accept the view in a legal, still less in a financial, sense that the
distinct terms of an Act of Parliament may be properly overridden by a
Supplementary Estimate supported by the Appropriation Act ... this matter
... is one of great importance from a constitutional point of view ...”
2.3.4 While the Treasury agreed in principle, the practice did not die out because
in 1908 the PAC again complained:
“... while it is undoubtedly within the discretion of Parliament to override
the provisions of an existing statute by a vote in Supply confirmed by the
Appropriation Act, it is desirable in the interests of financial regularity and
constitutional consistency that such a procedure should be resorted to as
rarely as possible, and only to meet a temporary emergency”.
A2.3.5 The PAC reverted to the issue in 1930 and again in 1932, citing a number of
cases involving various departments. It was concerned to specify how far an annual
Appropriation Act could be regarded as sufficient authority for the exercise of
functions by a government department in cases where no other specific statutory
authority exists. It took the view that:
“... where it is desired that continuing functions should be exercised by a
government department, particularly where such functions may involve
financial liabilities extending beyond a given financial year, it is proper,
subject to certain recognised exceptions, that the powers and duties to be
exercised should be defined by specific statute”.
A2.3.6 In reply, the Treasury Minute said:
66
