7.3.2 In framing founding documentation, the partners should adopt a
proportionate approach. Parliament expects that public funds will be used in a way
that gives reasonable assurance that public resources will be used to deliver the
intended objectives.
7.3.3 In this process the aim should be to put the accounting officers of the parties
in a position to take a well informed view on the current status of the relationship,
enabling timely adjustments to be made as necessary. It is good practice to develop
structured arrangements for regular dialogue between the parties to avoid
misunderstandings and surprises.
7.3.4 Further advice about framework documents is in annex 7.2. It is important
that such documents fit the business to which they relate (rather than following
precedent or copying a standard model).
7.4 Agencies
7.4.1 Each agency is either part of a central government department or a
department in its own right. Agencies are intended to bring professionalism and
customer focus to the management and delivery of central government services,
operating with a degree of independence from the centre of their home
departments. Some are also trading funds (see section 7.8).
7.4.2 Each agency is established with a framework document on the lines sketched
out in box 7.2. With the exception of those agencies which are trading funds (see
section 7.8), they are normally funded through public expenditure supplied by
Estimates. Departments should consult the Treasury and Cabinet Office about the
preparation of their framework documents.
7.5 Departments working together
7.5.1 To promote better delivery and enhance efficiency, departments often find it
useful to work with other government departments (or ALBs). This can make sense
where responsibilities overlap, or both operate in the same geographical areas or
with the same client groups - arrangements loosely categorised as joined up
government. Such arrangements can offer opportunities for departments to reduce
costs overall while each partner plays to its strengths.
7.5.2 Such relationships can be constituted in a number of different ways. Some
models are sketched in box 7.3. The list is not exhaustive.

49
