TOAENquiries@hmtreasury.gov.uk for the signature of the Treasury Permanent
Secretary. This should be done at least fourteen calendar days before the accounting
officer is due to take up their role.
3.2.5. In the case of appointment of an accounting officer for an arm's length
body, the body should liaise with its sponsoring department to arrange a letter of
appointment from the principal accounting officer. Again, this should be done at
least fourteen calendar days before the accounting officer is due to take up their
role. The private office of the principal accounting officer should then promptly
notify the TOA team.
3.2.6. These actions ensure that the register of accounting officers is kept up to
date and that appropriate training can be arranged.
3.2.7. If the timeframes above cannot be met, or in the event of a temporary gap
between the standing down of an accounting officer and the appointment of a new
accounting officer, the department should contact the TOA team to discuss the
appropriate mechanism to ensure accountability arrangements are maintained.
3.2.8. Template letters of appointment can be found on gov.uk. The TOA team is
happy to assist in the preparation of these letters.
3.3 Special responsibilities of accounting officers
Box 3.1: standards expected of the accounting officer's organisation
Acting within the authority of the minister(s) to whom they are responsible,
the accounting officer should ensure that the organisation, and any ALBs it
sponsors, operates effectively and to a high standard of probity. The
organisation should:
governance
e have a governance structure which transmits, delegates, implements and
enforces decisions
o have trustworthy internal controls to safeguard, channel and record
resources as intended
«work cooperatively with partners in the public interest
e operate with propriety and regularity in all its transactions
e treat its customers and business counterparties fairly, honestly and with
integrity
«offer appropriate redress for failure to meet agreed customer standards
give timely, transparent and realistic accounts of its business and decisions,
underpinning public confidence;
decision-making
® support its ministers with clear, well-reasoned, timely and impartial advice
13
