Annex 4.11
This annex discusses how, and how far, public sector organisations should seek to recover
overpayments — one case of special payments outside normal parliamentary process (section 4.7). In
difficult cases it is important to act on legal advice.

A4.11.1 Even good payment systems sometimes gowrong. Most organisations responsible

for making payments will sometimes discover that they have made overpayments in

error.In principle public sector organisations should always pursue recovery of

overpayments, irrespective of how they came to be made. In practice, however,

there will be both practical and legal limits to how cases should be handled. So each

case should be dealt with on its merits. Some overpayment scenarios are outlined in

box A4.11A. Where recovery of overpayments is not pursued the guidance in annex

A4.10 should be followed.
Box Ad.11A: possible reasons for overpayment
Contractors and suppliers
Overpayments in business transactions should always be pursued, irrespective of cause. It is
acceptable to recover by abating future payments if this approach offers value for money and helps
preserve goodwill. If the contractor resists, the overpaying organisation should consider taking legal
action, taking account of the strength of the case, and of legal advice.
Grants and subsidies
Overpayments to persons or corporate bodies should be treated as business transactions and a full
refund sought. The overpaying organisation should ask recipients to acknowledge the amount of the
debt in writing.
Pay, allowances, pensions
Overpayments to:
* civil servants
* members of the armed forces
«employees of NDPBs
+ retired teachers and NHS employees
+ and the dependants of any of these
should be pursued, taking proper account of how far recipients have acted in good faith. Similar cases
should be treated consistently. After warning recipients, recovery through deduction from future
salary or pension is often convenient. Legal advice is often wise to make sure that proper account has
been taken of any valid defence against recovery recipients may have.

111
