Box 7.5: outline terms for a relationship with a public corporation
* the shareholder's strategic vision for the business, including the rationale for public
ownership and the public sector remit of the business
* the capital structure of the business and the agreed dividend regime, with suitable
incentives for business performance
+ the business objectives the enterprise is expected to meet, balancing policy, customer,
shareholder and any regulatory interests
+ the department's rights and duties as shareholder, including:
- governance of the business
- procedure for appointments (and disappointments)
- financial and performance monitoring
- any necessary approvals processes
- the circumstances of, and rights upon, intervention
* details of any other relationships with any other parts of government
7.8 Trading funds
7.8.1 All trading funds are established under the Trading Funds Act 1973. Their
activities are not consolidated with their sponsor departments’ business. They must
finance their operations from trading activity.
7.8.2 Each trading fund is set up through an order subject to affirmative resolution.
Before an order can be laid in parliament, the Treasury needs to be satisfied that a
proposed trading fund can satisfy the statutory requirement that its business plan is
sustainable without additional funding in the medium term. A period of shadow
operation as a pilot trading fund may help inform this assessment.
7.8.3 Each trading fund must be financed primarily from its trading income. In
particular, each trading fund is expected to generate a financial return
commensurate with the risk of the business in which it is engaged. In practice this
means the target rate of return should be no lower than its cost of capital. The
actual return achieved may vary a little from one year to the next, reflecting the
market in which the trading fund operates.
7.8.4 The possible sources of capital for trading funds are shown in box 7.6. They
are designed to give trading funds freedom from the discipline of annual Estimate
funding. The actual mix for a given trading fund must be agreed with the sponsor
department (if there is one) and with the Treasury, subject to any agreed limits, eg
on borrowing.
7.8.5 Further detail about trading funds is in annex 7.3. Guidance on setting
charges for the goods and services trading funds sell is in chapter 6.
52
