* Value for money: ensuring that the organisation's procurement, projects
and processes are systematically evaluated to provide confidence about
suitability, effectiveness, prudence, quality, good value judged for the
Exchequer as a whole, not just for the accounting officer's organisation
(eg using the Green Book! to evaluate alternatives).

* Control: the accounting officer should personally approve and confirm
their agreement to all Cabinet Committee papers and major project or
policy initiatives before they proceed.

. Management of opportunity and risk to achieve the right balance
commensurate with the institutions business and risk appetite.

e Learning from experience, both using internal feedback (eg through
managing projects and programmes using techniques such as PRINCE2),
and from right across the public sector.

e Accounting accurately for the organisation's financial position and
transactions: to ensure that its published financial information is
transparent and up to date; and that the organisation's efficiency in the
use of resources is tracked and recorded.

3.3.4. In the case of principal accounting officers, these responsibilities apply to the
business of the whole departmental group.
3.4 Accounting officer assessments
3.4.1. Accounting officers should routinely scrutinise significant policy proposals or
plans to start or vary major projects and then assess whether they measure up to the
standards in box 3.2.
Box 3.2: the standards expected for projects and proposals
e Regularity: the proposal has sufficient legal basis, parliamentary authority,
and Treasury authorisation; and is compatible with the agreed spending
budgets.
Propriety: the proposal meets the high standards of public conduct and
relevant Parliamentary control procedures and expectations.
e Value for money: in comparison to alternative proposals or doing
nothing, the proposal delivers value for the Exchequer as a whole.
Feasibility: the proposal can be implemented accurately, sustainably, and

to the intended timetable.

3.4.2. A systematic written accounting officer assessment helps to ensure good
decision making and provides positive assurance that the four standards have been
properly considered.
1 hitps Awww. gov uk/governmenticollections/the-green-book-and-accompanying-quidance-and-documents

15
