Box 7.3: examples of joined up activities in central government

* one partner can act as lead provider selling services (such as IT, HR, finance functions) to
other(s) as customers, operating under service level agreement(s)

* cost sharing arrangements for common services (eg in a single building), allocated in
line with an indicator such as numbers of staff employed or areas of office space
occupied

* joint procurement using a collaborative protocol

*  ajoint venture project with its own governance, eg an agency or wholly owned
company, selling services to a number of organisations, some or all of which may be
public sector

* an outsourced service, delivering to several public sector customers

7.5.3 Shared services often need funding to set up infrastructure, eg to procure IT.
This could be agreed in a spending review, or customers could buy in to the
partnership by transferring budget provision to the lead provider. Each of the
accounting officers involved should be satisfied that the project offers value for
money for the Exchequer as a whole. The provider's charges should be at cost,
following the standard fees and charges rules (see chapter 6).
7.5.4 In any joint activity, there must be a single accounting officer so that the lines
of responsibility are clear. If the PAC decides to investigate, the accounting officers
of each of the participants should expect to be summoned as witnesses.
7.6 Non-departmental public bodies
7.6.1 Non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs) may take a number of legal forms,
including corporates and charities. Most executive NDPBs have a bespoke structure
set out in legislation or its equivalent (eg a Royal Charter2). This may specify in some
detail what task(s) the NDPB is to perform, what its powers are, and how it should
be financed. Sometimes primary legislation contains powers for secondary
legislation to set or vary the detail of the NDPB's structure. Annex 7.1 has links to
more about NDPBs.
7.6.2 Each NDPB is a special purpose body charged with responsibility for part of
the process of government. Each has a sponsor department with general oversight
of its activity. The sponsor department's report and accounts consolidates its NDPBs’
financial performance.
7.6.3 NDPBs show considerable variety of structures and working methods, with
scope for innovation and customisation. Some NDPBs may also need to work with
other organisations as well as with their sponsor. All this should be documented in
the framework document (see annex 7.2).
7.6.4 NDPBs' sources of finance vary according to their constitution and function.
Box 7.4 shows the main options available.
3 This route is no longer used - see Section 2.5.

50
