funder becoming exposed to assuming the recipient's debts. It is usual to take a
registered charge on land under the Land Registration Act 2002 and its Rules. If the
recipient is a Companies Act company, it may make sense to secure a registered
charge on the company’s book debts.

A5.2.12 The form and intended duration of any charge should be recorded in the
founding documents charting the relationship between the funder and recipient.
Both parties will need legal advice, eg covering the statutory background) and on
how the charge would be enforceable. Both parties should also keep track of their
outstanding charges. It is good practice to register a land charge, so that it will
automatically be taken into account during any sale process.

A5.2.13 Sometimes a funder may decide not to enforce clawback when a funded
asset is sold, even though the agreed clawback period is still in force. Funders
should take any such decision consciously on its merits, not letting it go by default.
Reasons why a funder might take this approach include:

+ the objectives of the grant may have been achieved;

+ the recipient may propose to use the funded asset in an acceptable way
different from the original purpose;

«the recipient may intend to finance an alternative asset or project
within the objectives of the grant scheme out of the proceeds of the
sale;

+ the funder might agree to abate future grants to the recipient instead
of taking the proceeds of sale.

A5.2.14 If a department decides to waive a clawback condition, it should consider
whether it needs to report that waiver as a gift. If so, it should follow the gift
reporting requirements in annex 4.12.
A5.2.15 If it is proposed to sell a grant recipient with a live charge, the funder
should take legal advice on whether it can enforce the charge on the proceeds of
the sale. The funder should consider the legal position of the proposed purchaser of
the grant recipient, and in particular whether its objectives (eg charitable or as a
social enterprise) are in line with the original grant conditions. If the funder becomes
aware that such a sale is possible at the time the grant is awarded, it would usually
be appropriate to require the recipient to obtain its consent before proceeding. And
any request for endorsement of a sale should be evaluated objectively.

140
