7.2.2 In general, each new ALB should have a specific purpose, distinct from its
parent department. There should be clear perceived advantage in establishing a new
organisation, such as separating implementation from policy making; demonstrating
the integrity of independent assessment; establishing a specialist identity for a
professional skill; or introducing a measure of commercial discipline. It is sensible to
be sceptical about setting up a new ALB, since it will often add to costs.
7.2.3 ALBs cannot be given authority to make decisions proper to ministers, nor to
perform functions proper to sponsor departments. Only rarely is a non-ministerial
department the right choice as NMDs have limited accountability to parliament2.
Nor is it acceptable to use a royal charter to establish a public sector body since such
arrangements deny parliament control and accountability.
7.2.4 A sponsor department cannot relinquish all responsibility for the business of
its ALBs by delegation. It should have oversight arrangements appropriate to the
importance, quality and range of the ALB's business. Normally new, large,
experimental or innovative ALBs need more attention from the sponsor than
established or small ALBs doing familiar or low risk business. And the sponsor
department always needs sufficient reserve powers to reconstitute the management
of each ALB should events require it (see section 3.8). .
7.2.5 The sponsor department should plan carefully to make sure that its oversight
arrangements and the internal governance of any new ALB are designed to work
together harmoniously without unnecessary intrusion. The ALB also needs effective
internal controls and budgetary discipline so that it can live within its budget
allocation and deliver its objectives. And the sponsor department must have
sufficient assurance to be able to consolidate its ALBs’ accounts with its own.
7.2.6 There is a good deal of flexibility about form and structure. It may be
expedient, for example, to set up an organisation which is eventually to be sold as a
Companies Act company. Or certain NDPBs may operate most effectively when
constituted as charities. Mutual structures can also be attractive. Innovation often
makes sense. The standard models are all capable of a good deal of customisation.
7.2.7 If the PAC decides to investigate an ALB, the accounting officers of both the
ALB and its sponsor department should expect to be called as witnesses. The PAC
will seek to be satisfied that the sponsor's oversight is adequate.
7.3 What to clarify
7.3.1 When documenting an agreement with a partner, public sector organisations
should analyse the relationship and consider how it might evolve. The framework
document (or equivalent) should then be kept up to date as the partnership
develops. Box 7.2 contains terms which should always be considered for inclusion.
The list is not exhaustive.
2 The sponsor department also has less control as each NMD has ts own budget, Estimate and annual accounts. So if a ministerial

department transfers work to an NMD, there is a greater risk of excess votes in each

a7
