exhaustive. Once agreed, the working rules should be reviewed from time to time to
keep them relevant. Boards should challenge themselves to improve their working
methods, so that their processes can achieve and maintain good modern business
practice.

Box 4.2: key decisions for boards

* mission and objectives

¢ delegations and arrangements for reporting performance

+ procedures and processes for business decision making

* scrutiny, challenge and control of significant policies, initiatives and projects

+ risk appetite and risk control procedures, eg maintaining and reviewing a risk register

* control and management of associated ALBs and other partnerships

«arrangements for refreshing the board

* arrangements for reviewing the board's own performance

* accountability — to the general public, to staff and other stakeholders (see section 4.13)

* how the insights of non-executives can be harnessed

* how often the board's working rules will be reviewed
4.2 Working methods
4.2.1 The accounting officer of each organisation is accountable to parliament for
the quality of the administration that they leads. The administrative standards
expected are set out in the Civil Service Code and the Ombudsman’s Principles of
Public Administrations. They allow considerable flexibility to fit with each
organisation's obligations and culture. It is against these standards that failure to
deliver is assessed.
4.2.2 Another fundamental concept is the Treasury's leadership position in
managing public expenditure, and setting the rules under which departments and
their ALBs should deploy the assets, people and other resources under their control.
In turn each public sector organisation should have robust and effective systems for
their internal management. Box 4.3 outlines the key decisions each organisation
needs to make.
4.2.3 To help the Treasury carry out this task properly:

«departments should provide the Treasury with accurate and timely
information about in-year developments - their expenditure,
performance against objectives and evolution of risk (eg serious
unforeseen events or discovery of fraud);

+ ALBs should provide their sponsor departments with similar
information; and

4 http:/www.chilsenvice gov uk/aboutivalues
 hitp:/Awww ombudsman, org uk/improving-public-senvicelombudsmansprinciples
23
