Annex 4.2
Use of models

implementation plans; and suggest how policies may evolve. Models should be controlled and

understood in their proper context, with effective quality assurance, so that they can be used to good

effect.
Control and governance
A4.2.1 Supported by the board, the accounting officer of a central government
organisation should oversee the use and quality assurance (QA) of models within the
organisation. There should be sufficient feedback for the accounting officer to be
able to track progress and adjust the process.
A4.2.2 Each business critical model should be managed by a senior responsible
officer (SRO) of sufficient seniority and experience, supported by experts and
specialists, to understand the use of the model in context. Project and programme
management techniques can be useful. It is good practice to avoid changing the
SRO frequently.
A4.2.3 Each model is limited by the quality of its input data and founding
assumptions. So the results of any model need to be treated with a degree of
scepticism. It is vital to build sufficient governance into each model to help its users
understand the value and weaknesses of its results. The apparent precision of
mathematical models should not mislead uses into putting more weight on them
than can be justified. Transparency should be the norm in the development and use
of all models.
Quality assurance
A4.2.4 Whatever the complexity of the model, its governance should include an
element of structured critical challenge to provide a sense check. It can take a
number of forms: for example a steering group, a project board or outside
assessment. New or untried models tend to require more QA than those using
recognised techniques.
A4.2.5 In an organisation using a great deal of modelling, it is good practice for the
accounting officer to appoint a QA champion. Effective QA demands dispassionate
scrutiny by people disengaged with the project but with sufficient knowledge and
experience to help steer the model into a successful approach. There may be a case
for ensuring that different models in different parts of the organisation use
consistent approaches.

79
