Annex 4.13
Special payments
This annex explains how public sector organisations should approach current transactions outside the
usual planned range. It is often right, or essential, to consult the Treasury beforehand. In some cases,
it is also important to notify parliament.
A4.13.1 In voting money or passing specific legislation, parliament does not and cannot
approve special payments outside the normal range of departmental activity. Such
transactions are therefore subject to greater control than other payments.
A4.13.2 Departments should authorise special payments only after careful appraisal
of the facts and when satisfied that the best course has been identified. It is good
practice to consider routinely whether particular cases reveal concerns about the
soundness of the control systems; and whether they have been respected as
expected. It is also important to take any necessary steps to put failings right.
A4.13.3 Arm's length bodies should operate to similar standards as departments
unless there are good reasons to the contrary, eg overriding requirements of the
statutory framework for Companies Act companies. Departments should ensure that
their oversight arrangements (see chapter 7) enable them to be satisfied that their
arm's length bodies observe the standards.
Dealing with special payments
A4.13.4 Departments should always consult the Treasury about special payments
unless there are specific agreed delegation arrangements in place (See Annex 2.2).
So a department should seek Treasury approval, in advance, for any special payment
for which it has no delegated authority, or which exceeds its authority. Similarly,
ALBs should consult their sponsor departments in comparable circumstances. In
turn, the department may need to consult the Treasury.
A4.13.5 The special payments on which the Treasury may need to be consulted are
summarised in box A4.13A. The list is not exclusive. If a department is in doubt, it is
usually better to consult the Treasury.
A4.13.6 In particular, it is important to consult the Treasury about any cases,
irrespective of delegations, which:
«involve important questions of principle;
+ raise doubts about the effectiveness of existing systems;
+ contain lessons which might be of wider interest;
119
