Notifying liabilities to parliament

A5.4.26 The rules for notifying parliament of liabilities are very similar to those for
public expenditure. Generally speaking there is no requirement to inform parliament
about any liability which:

+ arises in the normal course of business;

+ arises under statutory powers (subject to third bullet point of paragraph
A5.4.23); or,

«would normally require notification (i.e. neither arising in the normal
course of business nor under statutory powers) but is under £300,000
in value.

A5.4.27 There are some exceptions to this general rule. Parliament should be
notified of any liability, even if it meets one or more of the criteria given in
paragraph A5.4.22, which:

«arises as a result of a specific guarantee, indemnity or letter of comfort
where the guarantee is not of a type routinely used in commercial
business dealings;

«is of such a size, relative to the department's total budget, that
parliament should be given notice;

+ arises under specific statutory powers which require parliament to be
notified; or,

+ is novel, contentious or potentially repercussive

A5.4.28 It is important to note that undertakings in the normal course of business
should be judged against the department's normal business pattern authorised by
parliament. So what may be normal for some departments may not be normal for
others. In cases of doubt it is best to report.

5.4.29 Non-statutory liabilities which need to be reported to parliament should be
notified by Written Ministerial Statement and accompanying departmental Minute
(see box A5.4C). Treasury approval is required before going ahead. It is sometimes
necessary, with Treasury agreement, to adapt the form of wording, eg if the liability
arises immediately.

A5.4.30 Written Ministerial Statements and departmental Minutes should be laid in
the House of Commons, on the same day, and should briefly outline the nature of
the contingent liability and confirm that a departmental Minute providing full details
has been laid in the House of Commons.

A5.4.31 Departmental Minutes should:

+ use the standard wording for the opening and closing passages, which
has been agreed with the PAC (box A.5.4C);

+ describe the amount and expected duration of the proposed liability,
giving an estimate if precision is impossible;

«explain which bodies are expected to benefit, and why;

148
