gratia grant schemes to be financed on the authority of the Appropriation Act alone
provided that the scheme meets the standard conditions (see section 2.5).
A5.1.6 The accounting officer of the funding organisation is responsible for
ensuring that grant recipients are eligible and use the grant in the way envisaged in
the founding legislation, with terms and conditions set out in a grant funding
agreement. For grants in aid, it is usual to arrange this by setting out terms and
conditions in a framework document sent to recipients to explain their
responsibilities. Such framework documents should strike an appropriate balance
among:

e ensuring prudent management of grant in aid funds;

e achieving value for money;

e assuring funders that grants are used as envisaged; while

eo allowing recipients reasonable freedom to take their own decisions.
However, care needs to be taken as general and wide ranging conditions attached
to grant in aid can transfer control of a body to a funder for public sector
classification purposes.
A5.1.7 Accounting Officers should ensure that all grants issued comply with the
Government Functional Standard for grants.
A5.1.8 Departments should understand enough about the other sources of a grant
recipient's income to be satisfied that the same need is not funded twice, this
should include an internal and cross-government check of grant funding awards. It
is usually essential to segregate inflows from different recipients since they are
usually intended for different purposes.
A5.1.9 Departments which provide grants of either kind to an arm's length body
should document how the recipient is expected to handle the funds. See annex 7.2
for more.
A5.1.10 Departments should ensure that they have adequate assurance
arrangements in place, which take account of an assessment of fraud risk, and that
the Comptroller and Auditor General has adequate access rights to grant recipients.
A5.1.11 A department asked by another part of government to pay a grant to an
external organisation, such as a charity, from its own resources should ensure that
its own accounting officer gives due consideration to the proposal before funding is
committed.
Protecting the Exchequer
A5.1.12 If public sector organisations provide grants to private sector organisations
to acquire or develop assets, suitable and proportionate steps should be taken to
safeguard both their financial interests and those of the Exchequer. Donors should
consider setting grant conditions designed to ensure that the Exchequer’s interest is
not overlooked if the asset is not used as expected (see annex 5.2).
1 hitps://www.gov.ukigovemment/publications/grants-standards

135
