take account of their special responsibilities and powers. In particular, they must
respect the legislation (or equivalent) establishing the organisation and terms of the
framework document agreed with the sponsor department. See chapter 7 for more.
3.10.2. The framework document (or equivalent) agreed between an ALB and its
sponsor always provides for the sponsor department to exercise meaningful
oversight of the ALB's strategy and performance, pay arrangements and/or major
financial transactions, eg by monthly returns, standard delegations and exception
reporting. The sponsor department's accounts consolidate those of its ALBs so its
accounting officer must be satisfied that the consolidated accounts are accurate and
not misleading.
3.10.3. Overall, the accounting officer of a sponsor department should make
arrangements to satisfy himself or herself that that the ALB has systems adequate to
meet the standards in box 3.1. Similarly, the accounting officer of an ALB with a
subsidiary should have meaningful oversight of the subsidiary. It is not acceptable to
establish ALBs, or subsidiaries to ALB, in order to avoid or weaken parliamentary
scrutiny.
3.10.4. Exceptionally, the accounting officer of a sponsor department may need to
intervene if an ALB drifts significantly off track, eg if its budget is threatened, its
systems are badly defective or it falls into disrepute. This may include replacing some
or all of the leaders of the ALB, possibly even its accounting officer.
3.10.5. There are sensitivities about the role of the accounting officer in an ALB
which is governed by an independent fiduciary board, eg a charity or company. The
ALB's accounting officer, who will normally be a member of the board, must take
care that their personal legal responsibilities do not conflict with their duties as a
board member. In particular, the accounting officer should vote against any
proposal which appears to cause such a conflict; it is not sufficient to abstain.
3.10.6. Moreover, if the chair or board of such an ALB is contemplating a course of
action that is inconsistent with the standards in box 3.1, then the accounting officer
should follow the procedure set out in the organisation's framework document. This
process is similar to what happens in departments (see section 3.6), but will be
tailored to reflect the position of the organisation's board, which is often appointed
under statute.
3.11 In the round
3.11.1. It is not realistic to set firm rules for every aspect of the business with which
an accounting officer may deal. Sometimes the accounting officer may need to take
a principled decision on the facts in circumstances with no precedents. Should that
happen, the accounting officer should be guided by the standards in box 3.1 in
assessing whether there is a case for seeking a direction for any of the factors in box
3.2. It is essential that accounting officers seek good outcomes for the Exchequer as
a whole, respecting the key principles of transparency and parliamentary approval
for management of public resources.
3.11.2. In addition, there may be occasions where it is necessary to respond urgently
to events, reducing the time available for analysis and requiring the accounting
officer to make an assessment. In such circumstances, all available options may carry
more uncertainty and more risk than would be acceptable in more normal times.

20
