A4.15.15 In addition, the overage provisions may be agreed by a central government purchaser
of property where it is a condition of the sale of that property by a local government or
devolved administration body. In all cases the purchase must represent value for money for the
Exchequer as a whole and Treasury consent should be sought.
Disposals of property and land assets
A4.15.16 Public sector organisations should take professional advice when disposing of land
and property assets. Some key guidelines are in box A4.15D.
Box A4.15D: protocol for disposal of land, property and other assets
* Value assets at market prices using Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors’ Red Book
(www.rics. org).
+ Dispose of surplus land property within three years.
+ Dispose of surplus residential property within six months.
+ Sell plant, machinery, office equipment, furniture and consumable stores by public auction as
seen; or by open tender. Obtain payment before releasing the goods.
+ Ifan asset is sold or leased at a loss, the proceeds forgone (compared to market value) should be
treated as a gift, and the routine in annex 4.12 should be followed.
A4.15.17 Sometimes private finance projects involve disposals. Each such case should be
evaluated as part of the private finance project, with due attention to the need to secure good
value for money. Further guidance is an annex 7.4.
A4.15.18 Public sector organisations which make grants to third parties for the acquisition of
assets should normally include a clawback condition under which they can recoup the proceeds
if the recipient of the grant later sells the asset. There is some scope for flexibility in this
discipline: see annex 5.2.
A4.15.19 Disposals to charities require particular care. Their trust deeds sometimes place
restrictions on how they may use their assets. It is good practice to consider the possible
disposal of assets by such recipients before making gifts to them.
Economic infrastructure assets
A4.15.20 Managing economic infrastructure affects the quality of delivery of services. It is also
central to achievement of the national infrastructure goals detailed in the National Infrastructure
Plan. These factors need to be incorporated into the business plans and objectives of public
sector organisations which hold, use and manage such assets.
A4.15.21 Good asset management of economic infrastructure thus calls for the responsible
organisations to coordinate their own and their stakeholders’ objectives. Sometimes securing
value for money for the taxpayer means compromise between cost, risks, opportunities and
performance. Finding the right solution can affect organisations’ long-term plans, their
prioritisation of resources and work to achieve realism in stakeholder expectations, as set out in
the National Infrastructure Plan.
132
