Annex 4.1
Finance Directors
It is government policy that all departments should have professional finance directors reporting to
the permanent secretary with a seat on the departmental board, at a level equivalent to other board
members. It is good practice for all other public sector organisations to do the same, and to operate
to the same standards. This annex sets out the main duties and responsibilities of finance directors.
The finance function
A4.1.1 The finance director of a public sector organisation should:
+ be professionally qualified;
«have board status equivalent to other board members;
+ report directly to the permanent head of the organisation;
«be a member of the senior leadership team, the management board
and the executive committee (and/or equivalent bodies), and of the
cross-government Finance Function.
A4.1.2 This demanding leadership role requires a persuasive and confident
communicator with the stature and credibility to command respect and influence at
all levels through the organisation. Its main features are described in box A4.1A.
Many of the day-to-day responsibilities may in practice be delegated, but the
finance director should maintain oversight and control. In large part these duties
consist of ensuring that the financial aspects of the accounting officer's
responsibilities are carried through to the organisation and its arm's length bodies
(ALBs) in depth.
Box Ad. 1A: the role of the finance director
governance
« financial leadership, both within the organisation and to its ALBs, at both a strategic
and operational level
* ensuring sound and appropriate financial governance and risk management
1 The term professional finance director in this context means both being a qualified member of one of the five bodies comprising
the Consultative Committee of Accounting Bodies (CAB) in the UK and Ireland, ie the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and
Accountancy, the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland,
the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland, the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants, or having equivalent
professional skills andor qualifications; and having relevant prior experience of financial management in either the private or the
public sector.
76
