range of models should be considered, for example employee-led mutuals and joint ventures as
well as more traditional outsourcing.

Box A4.6C: the legal framework for public procurement

* international obligations, notably WTO agreements

* domestic legislation, including subordinate legislation implementing directives;

* contract and commercial law in general

¢ domestic case law
The procurement process and suppliers
A4.6.7 Competition promotes economy, efficiency and effectiveness in public expenditure.
Works, goods and services should be acquired through competition unless there are convincing
reasons to the contrary, and where appropriate should comply with domestic advertising rules
and policy as well as relevant obligations imposed on the UK by its international agreements.
The form of competition chosen should be appropriate to the value and complexity of the goods
or services to be acquired.
A4.6.8 Public sector organisations should aim to treat suppliers responsibly to maintain good
reputations as purchasers (see box A4.6D), taking account of the government's Procurement
pledge to help stimulate economic growth’.

Box A4.6D: relationships with suppliers

* high professional standards in the award of contracts

* clear procurement contact points

* adequate information for suppliers to respond to the bidding process

* the outcome of bids announced promptly

«feedback to winners and losers on request on the outcome of the bidding process

* high professional standards in the management of contracts

* prompt, courteous and efficient responses to suggestions, enquiries and complaints
A4.6.9 In carrying out efficient sourcing projects, central government should follow best
practice.
A4.6.10 One such approach is LEAN approach# whose principles are designed to make doing
business with government more efficient and cost-effective (for both buyers and suppliers) to
support economic growth.
A4.6.11 During the evaluation stage of sourcing, it is important to for public sector procuring
organisations to:

+ establish the propriety of candidate suppliers — taking account of the requirement
to exclude those convicted of, for example, fraud, theft, fraudulent trading or
cheating HMRC;

3 Procurement Pledge (htto:/ww.cabinetolfice. gov uklresource-ibrary/our-procurement. pledge)
4 hitos://www. gov uklgovernment/publications/lean-sourcing-guidance-for-public-sector-buyers
%
