Box 2.3: examples of transactions requiring explicit Treasury consent
* extra statutory payments similar to but outside statutory schemes
* ephemeral ex gratia payment schemes, eg payments to compensate for official errors
* special severance payments, eg compromise agreements in excess of contractual
commitments
* non-standard payments in kind
+ unusual financial transactions, eg imposing lasting commitments or using tax avoidance
* unusual schemes or policies using novel techniques
2.3.5 Itis improper for a public sector organisation to spend or make commitments
outside the agreed delegations. The Treasury may subsequently agree to give
retrospective consent, but only if the expenditure in question would have been
agreed if permission had been sought at the right time.
2.3.6 Sometimes legislation calls for explicit Treasury consent, eg for large or critical
projects. There are also Whitehall wide controls on key progress points for the very
largest projects.3 In such cases it is unlawful to proceed without Treasury consent -
and Treasury consent cannot be given retrospectively.
2.4 Regularity and propriety
2.4.1 The concepts of regularity and propriety, fundamental to the right use of
public funds, are set out in box 2.4. The term regularity and propriety is often used
to convey the idea of probity and ethics in the use of public funds — that is,
delivering public sector values in the round, encompassing the qualities summarised
in box 1.1. Supporting this concept are the Seven Principles of Public Life - the Nolan
principles - which apply to the public sector at large. In striving to meet these
standards, central government departments should give a lead to the partners with
which they work.
Box 2.4: regularity and propriety
Regularity: compliant with the relevant legislation and wider legal principles such as subsidy control
and procurement law, delegated authorities and following the guidance in this document.
Propriety: meeting high standards of public conduct, including robust governance and the relevant
parliamentary expectations, especially transparency.
2.4.2 Each departmental accounting officer should make sure that ministers in their
department appreciate:
+ the importance of operating with regularity and propriety; and
3 Through the Major Projects Authority, [htto/Awww.cabinetoffice. gov.ul/content/major-projects-authority], using powers delegated
by the Treasury
4 htto/www.public-standards.gov.uk/
9
