Annex 4.10
Losses and write offs
This annex sets out what is expected when departments and their arms length bodies (ALBs) incur
losses or write off the values of assets, including details of when to notify parliament.
A4.10.1 As parliament does not agree or approve advance provision for potential future
losses when voting money or passing specific legislation, such transactions when
they arise are subject to greater scrutiny and control than other payments. Public
sector organisations should only consider accepting losses and write-offs after
careful appraisal of the facts (including whether all reasonable action has been taken
to effect recovery — see Annex 4.11), and should be satisfied that there is no feasible
alternative. In dealing with individual cases, departments must always consider the
soundness of their internal control systems, the efficiency with which they have been
operated, and take any necessary steps to put failings right.
A4.10.2 The guidance in this chapter relates to cash and fiscal losses. It is not
intended for losses that do not impact on the fiscal position. For example, erroneous
debit balances that result in an accounting adjustment but not a cash loss should
not be disclosed in the losses statement.
Levels of delegation
A4.10.3 Departments have delegated authority to deal with all losses, unless there
are specific delegations put in place, subject to paragraph A4.10.4. Box A4.10A
provides examples of the different categories of loss.
Box A4.10A: examples of losses
Losses
* cash losses: physical losses of cash and its equivalents (eg credit cards, electronic
transfers)
* realised exchange rate and hedging losses: losses due to fluctuations in exchange rates
or hedging instruments
* losses of pay, allowances and superannuation benefits paid to civil servants, members of
the armed forces and ALB employees: including overpayments due to miscalculation,
misinterpretation, or missing information; unauthorised issues; and other causes
+ losses arising from overpayments: of social security benefits, grants, subsidies etc
* losses arising from failure to make adequate charges: eg for the use of public property.
105
