Box 4.7: public sector organisations as good employers

* selection designed to value and make good use of talent and potential of all kinds

+ fairness, integrity, honesty, impartiality and objectivity

* professionalism in the relevant disciplines, always including finance

+ arrangements to make sure that staff are loaded cost effectively

* management techniques balancing incentives to improve and disciplines for poor

performance

+ diversity valued and personal privacy respected

+ mechanisms to support efficient working practices, both normally and under pressure

+ arrangements for whistleblowers to identify problems privately without repercussions.
4.9.3 Similarly public sector employers have a right to expect good standards of
conduct from their employees. The qualities and standards expected of civil servants
are set out in the Civil Service Code. Other public sector employees should strive for
similar standards, appropriate to their context.
4.10 Assets
4.10.1 All public sector organisations own or use a range of assets. Each
organisation needs to devise an appropriate asset management strategy to define
how it acquires, maintains, tracks, deploys and disposes of the various kinds of
assets it uses. Annex 4.15 discusses how to set up and use such a strategy.
4.10.2 It is good practice for public sector organisations to take stock of their assets
from time to time and consider afresh whether they are being used efficiently and
deliver value for public funds. If there is irreducible spare capacity there may be
scope to use part of it for other government activities, or to exploit it commercially
for non-statutory business.
4.11 Standards of service
4.11.1 Poor quality public services are not acceptable. Public sector organisations
should define what their customers, business counterparties and other stakeholders
can expect of them.
4.11.2 Standards can be expressed in a number of ways. Examples include
guidelines (eg response times), targets (eg take-up rates) or a collection of customer
rights in a charter. Even where standards are not set explicitly, they may sometimes
be inferred from the way the provider organisation carries out its responsibilities; so
itis normally better to express them directly.
4.11.3 Whatever standards are set, they should be defined in a measurable way,
with plans for recording performance, so that delivery can be readily gauged. It is
good practice to use customer feedback, including from complaints, to reassess
from time to time whether standards or their proxies (milestones, targets, outcomes)
remain appropriate and meaningful.
4.11.4 Where public sector organisations fail to meet their standards, or where they
fall short of reasonable behaviour, it may be appropriate to consider offering
remedies. These can take a variety of forms, including apologies, restitution (eg

29
