«might create a precedent for other departments;
«may be deemed novel, contentious, or repercussive; or
+ arise because of obscure or ambiguous instructions issued centrally.

Box Ad.13A: special payments

+ extra-contractual payments: payments which, though not legally due under contract,
appear to place an obligation on a public sector organisation which the courts might
uphold. Typically these arise from the organisation's action or inaction in relation to a
contract. Payments may be extra-contractual even where there is some doubt about
the organisation's liability to pay, eg where the contract provides for arbitration but a
settlement is reached without it. (A payment made as a result of an arbitration award is
contractual.)

*  extra-statutory and extra-regulatory payments are within the broad intention of the
statute or regulation, respectively, but go beyond a strict interpretation of its terms.

* compensation payments are made to provide redress for personal injuries (except for
payments under the Civil Service Injury Benefits Scheme), traffic accidents, damage to
property etc, suffered by civil servants or others. They include other payments to those
in the public service outside statutory schemes or outside contracts.

. special severance payments are paid to employees, contractors and others outside of
normal statutory or contractual requirements when leaving employment in public
service whether they resign, are dismissed or reach an agreed termination of contract.

+ exgratia payments go beyond statutory cover, legal liability, or administrative rules,
including:

payments made to meet hardship caused by official failure or delay
- out of court settlements to avoid legal action on grounds of official inadequacy
- payments to contractors outside a binding contract, eg on grounds of hardship.
A4.13.7 The Treasury does not condemn all special payments out of hand. Each
needs to be justified properly in the public interest against the key public sector
principles set out in Chapter 1, box 1.1, with particular emphasis on value for money
since there is no legal liability. Any proposal to keep a special payment confidential
must be justified especially carefully since confidentiality could appear to mask
underhand dealing. Also financial reporting requirements and Freedom of
Information legislation should be complied with. The Treasury's bottom line is
usually to ask the department to establish that the responsible accounting officer(s)
would feel able to justify the proposed payment in parliament if challenged.
A4.13.8 Departments should also consult the Treasury about proposals for special
payments above the relevant delegated limits. They should explain:
+ the nature and circumstances of the case;
+ the amount involved;
+ the legal advice, where appropriate;
+ the management procedures followed;
120
