+ assess suppliers’ economic and financial standing to gain confidence of their
capacity to carry out fully what the buyer requires within the pre-determined
timescale and deliver value for money;

+ secure value for money (see box A.4.6B), using relevant and consistent criteria for
evaluating the key factors (cost, size, sustainability, design etc).

Contracts
A4.6.12 In drawing up contracts, purchasers should, where possible:

+ use model terms and conditions developed in the light of collective experience and
which may help avoid prejudicing the position of others using the same supplier;

+ avoid variation of price clauses in contracts of less than two years' duration; and

+ Include prompt payment clauses.

A4.6.13 Purchasers cannot enter into contracts with other parts of the legal entity to which they
belong, so different parts of the Crown cannot contract with each other. Instead internal
agreements which fall short of being contracts are used (typically service level agreements).
These may have all the hallmarks of contracts other than scope for legal enforcement.
Central purchasing bodies and agencies

A4.6.14 Central government organisations are required to use the services and collaborative
procurement deals managed by the Government Procurement Service on behalf of governments.
A4.6.15 If public sector purchasers employ private sector agents to undertake procurement on
their behalf they should:

+ require compliance with the law (see box A4.6C);

. ensure clear allocation of responsibilities; and

+ where appropriate, obtain the agent's indemnity against any costs incurred as a
result of its failure to comply with the legal framework on its behalf.

Taxation
A4.6.16 Central government bodies should:

+ base procurement decisions independent of any tax advantages that may arise from
a particular bid;

+ avoid contractors using offshore jurisdictions, consistent with international
obligations and the government's stated objectives on tax transparency and
openness;

+ be vigilant in not facilitating tax arrangements with suppliers or their agents that
are detrimental or disadvantageous to the Exchequer. Public sector organisations
need to take special care in relation to the tax arrangements of public appointees
(see Cabinet Office guidances);

5 Cabinet Office guidance: hitos://www gov. uklgovermmentiorganisationscrown-commercial-service
© Cabinet Office guidance: Procurement Policy Note — Tax arrangements of Public Appointees.
o7
