recipient organisation decides that there is a case for an ex gratia payment, it should
obtain Treasury consent if the amount involved is outside the organisations
delegated powers. Similarly, there may be a case for ex gratia payments to make
good underpayments to government employees unless they were dilatory in making
their claims.
Change of position
A4.11.15 The recipient of an overpayment may seek to rely on change of position if
he or she has in good faith reacted to the overpayment by relying on it to change
their lifestyle. It might then be inequitable to seek to recover the full amount of the
overpayment. The paying organisation's reaction should depend on the facts of the
case. The onus is on the recipient to show that it would be unfair to repay the
money. This defence is difficult to demonstrate.
Estoppel
A4.11.16 A recipient who has changed his or her position may also be able to rely
on the rule of evidence estoppel if the paying organisation misled the recipient
about his or her entitlement, even if the overpayment was caused by a fault on the
part of the recipient. However, a mistaken payment will not normally of itself
constitute a representation that the payee can keep it. There must normally be some
further indication of the recipient's supposed title other than the mere fact of
payment.
A4.11.17 The paying organisation can be prevented from recovery even where it has
made no positive statement to the payee that the latter is entitled to the money
received. If, following a demand for repayment, the recipient can give reasons why
repayment should not be made, then silence from paying organisation would
almost certainly entitle the recipient to conclude that the reply was satisfactory and
that he or she could keep the money.
A4.11.18 It is essential for public sector organisations to seek legal advice where
change of position or estoppel is offered as defence against recovery.
Good consideration
A4.11.19 Another possible defence against recovery is where someone makes a
payment for good consideration, i.e. where the recipient gives something in return
for the payment. For example, payment might be made to discharge a debt; or
where the payment is part of a compromise to deal with an honest claim. If such
payments are later found to be more than was strictly due, the extent to which the
paying organisation was acting in good faith should be taken into account.
Hardship
A4.11.20 Public sector organisations may waive recovery of overpayments where it
is demonstrated that recovery would cause hardship. But hardship should not be
confused with inconvenience. Where the recipient has no entitlement, repayment
does not in itself amount to hardship, especially if the overpayment was discovered
quickly. Acceptable pleas of hardship should be supported by reasonable evidence
that the recovery action proposed by the paying organisation would be detrimental
to the welfare of the debtor or the debtor's family. Hardship is not necessarily
limited to financial hardship; public sector organisations may waive recovery of

114
