the need for efficiency, economy, effectiveness and prudence in the administration
of public resources, to secure value for public moneys.
2.4.3 Should a minister seek a course of action which the accounting officer cannot
reconcile with any aspect of these requirements, they should seek instructions in
writing from the minister before proceeding (see chapter 3).
2.4.4 Should departments need to resolve an issue about regularity or propriety,
they should consult the relevant Treasury spending team. Similarly, ALBs should
consult their sponsor departments about such issues, and the department
concerned may in turn consult the Treasury.
2.4.5 Neither improper nor irregular expenditure achieves the standards that
parliament expects. So any such expenditure must be noted in the department's
annual report and accounts. If the discrepancy is material it can result in a
qualification to the accounts. When any expenditure of this kind comes to light, it
should be drawn to the attention of both the NAO and the Treasury. The immediate
follow up action is to identify the source of any systematic problems so that there is
no recurrence. The PAC may also call the accounting officer to explain the matter at
a public hearing.
2.5 Securing adequate legal authority
2.5.1 Parliament usually authorises spending on a specific policy or service by
approving bespoke legislation setting out in some detail how it should work. It is
not normally acceptable to use a royal charter as an alternative to primary
legislation, for this approach robs parliament of its expectations for control and
accountability. Departments should ensure that both they and their ALBs have
adequate legal cover for any specific actions they undertake.
2.5.2 The Treasury takes this requirement seriously. It is fundamental to the trust
and understanding between the government and parliament on which management
of the public finances is founded. In the Concordat of 1932 (see annex 2.3), the
Treasury undertook that departments would not spend without adequate legal
authority.
2.5.3 There are some general exceptions. These kinds of expenditure do not require
specific legislation in order to avoid burdening parliamentary time:

+ routine matters covered by common law (the main examples are in box

2.5);
«avery limited range of Consolidated Fund Standing Services (see section
5.3);
2.5.4 Projects or services which are modest or temporary (see box 2.6). This
exception cannot be used to plug a gap in spending authority before specific
legislation for an ongoing service is passed. The temporary services derogation only
applies to initiatives lasting no more than two years in total, and it is therefore
important to note that this does not provide a two-year grace period for spending
on a new, ongoing service before specific legislation is required.
5 Amore detailed description of value for money is at annex 4.4
10
