should also consider the case for a written statement to parliament. Departments
should not hesitate to notify parliament of any losses which it would be proper to
bring to their attention.
Losses and claims records
A4.10.7 Public sector organisations should maintain an up to date record of losses.
The record should show:

+ the nature, gross amount (or estimate where an accurate value is

unavailable), and cause of each loss;
+ the action taken, total recoveries and date of write-off where
appropriate; and

+ the annual accounts in which each loss is to be noted.
A4.10.8 A losses statement is required in annual accounts where total losses exceed
£300,000. Individual losses of more than £300,000 should be noted separately.
Losses should be reported on an accruals basis.
A4.10.9 Where efforts are still being made to secure recovery of cash losses formally
written off, charged to the accounts and noted, public sector organisations should
consider including them in a record of claims to ensure that recovery is not
overlooked.
Accounting for cash losses
A4.10.10 Cash losses may initially be accounted for as debtors in annual accounts
pending recovery or write-off.
A4.10.11 When a department incurs a cash loss it should charge it to the
appropriate budget subhead in the Estimate, and for accounts recognise the cost in
accordance with the FReM.
A4.10.12 Where a cash loss is wholly or partly recovered by reducing the amounts
of pay or pension’ which would otherwise be due, or under statutory or other
specific powers2 only the resulting outstanding balance is treated as a loss to be
written off. The sum(s) are charged to the relevant budget boundary as if they had
been paid to the individual concerned who then used the money to pay the claim.
A4.10.13 Similarly, where the loss is wholly or partly met by voluntary payments by
the person responsible or by a payment from an insurance company or other non-
public source, only the net loss is written off. If, however, there are no powers to
apply the sums withheld by non-issue of pay etc, the gross amount of the loss is
written off.
A4.10.14 Generally, no note is necessary if the net loss is nil by the time the annual
accounts are finalised. There may, however, be exceptions (eg losses arising from
culpable causes) where the circumstances of the loss are such as to make it proper
to bring them to the notice of parliament by inclusion in the Losses Statement.
1 Tax must be deducted from pay or pension subject to PAYE withheld in settlement of a loss, to arrive at the amount attributed to

debt repayment.
2 For example, Queen's Regulations
107
