be scored as the department's best assessment of the need to pay out in support of
the liabilities.
A5.4.6 In the nature of giving liabilities, many will arise with little notice.
Departments should report these to parliament at the earliest opportunity. There is a
standard procedure for doing this: see paragraphs A.5.5.22 to A.5.5.36 of this
annex.
A5.4.7 If a liability taken on in this way seems likely to persist, the department
concerned should consider backing it with statutory cover. This is because any
expenditure which arises because of it is subject to the same parliamentary
expectations about statutory powers as any other expenditure (see section 2.1). If a
contingent liability could give rise to a loan, the organisation should ensure that
there is reasonable likelihood of the loan being serviced and repaid (see section 5.6).
A5.4.8 There is an exception to the need for statutory powers for accepting
liabilities. Commitments taken on in the normal course of business do not need
specific cover, just as routine administrative expenditure does not (see para 2.3.2).
The standard conditions for treating liabilities as undertaken in the normal course of
business are set out in box A.5.4A, with some common examples. What may be the
normal course of business for one department may not be the normal course of
business for another.
Box AS5.4A: Liabilities arising in the normal course of business
In order to treat a liability as arising in the normal course of business, the organisation concerned
should be able to show that:
the activity is an unavoidable part of its business and/or
* parliament could reasonably be assumed to have accepted that such liabilities can
rest on the sole authority of the Supply and Appropriation Act, based on the
activities it has previously authorised.
Examples of common liabilities arising in the normal course of business include:
«liabilities arising in the course of the purchase or supply of goods and services in the
discharge of the department's business
* contractual commitments to make payments in future years arising under long-term
contracts, eg major building works
* commitments to pay grants in future years under a statutory grant scheme
«contingent liabilities resulting from non-insurance (see annex 4.4).
A5.4.9 If procurement in the normal course of business gives rise to proposals for
liabilities outside the normal range (eg a cap on the contractor's liabilities), the
public sector organisation should consider renegotiating. The acid test is whether
two private sector bodies would use the same terms. In cases of doubt, the Treasury
should be consulted.
144
