3.4.3. An accounting officer assessment should be produced for projects or
programmes which form part of the Government Major Projects Portfolio (GMPP):
. alongside the request for the accounting officer's approval of the Outline
Business Case (or at the point when it enters the GMPP if this is later)

e at subsequent stages of the project if it departs from the four standards
or the agreed plan — including any contingency — in terms of costs,
benefits, timescales, or level of risk, which informed the accounting
officer's previous approval

if the Senior Responsible Owner (SRO) of the project decides one is
merited at any other stage of the project

3.4.4. In addition, it is good practice to prepare an accounting officer assessment
for each novel and contentious transaction or proposal involving the use of public
funds. This may be particularly useful where it is not possible to produce a fully
developed business case, for example due to lack of time and/or data, or the risk
environment is higher than usual. The Treasury often asks spending departments
and organisations for such analyses before clearing them to proceed, as will the
National Audit Office (NAO) when conducting any review of the issue.
3.4.5. Beyond that, in many cases, the normal governance procedures, such as
production and approval of business cases, should provide sufficient assurance
against the accounting officer standards, without need for a bespoke accounting
officer assessment.
3.4.6. All draft accounting officer assessments must be signed off by the
organisation's senior officer for finance (usually Finance Director, Chief Financial
Officer or Director General for Finance) or alternate senior member of the finance
function within the department before being submitted to the Accounting Officer
for final sign off.
3.4.7. Whenever an accounting officer assessment is produced for a GMPP project,
a summary of the key points should also be prepared and published. Accounting
officers may also choose to publish similar information from assessments made in
other circumstances at their discretion.
3.4.8. Further guidance on producing and publishing accounting officer
assessments can be found in Accounting Officer Assessments: guidance.
3.5 Working with other organisations
3.5.1. It often makes sense for two or more departments to work together to
deliver public services. In such circumstances, each accounting officer remains
personally responsible for the resources of their own organisation. It is good practice
for participating bodies to document their respective responsibilities, for example by
way of a memorandum of understanding.
3.5.2. It may also be the case that, in assessing a project or proposal, the
accounting officer will want to draw on expertise from another department or
public body. Where this happens, the accounting officer may ask the organisation to
provide written assurances of the robustness of the analysis and any underlying
2 www.gov.uk/government/publications/accounting-officer-assessments

16
