commercial insurance, perhaps through letters of comfort or statements of support. The
costs and benefits of taking out insurance should be included in the appraisal of the
project as a whole.

A4.4.3 Some ALBs may be in a slightly different position to central government

departments. Box A4.4B gives examples of some items they may choose to insure

commercially.

Box A4.4B: [tems ALBs may insure

* items the ALB is required to insure, eg vehicles where the Road Traffic Acts require it.

+ physical assets where a cost benefit analysis supports the case for insurance and the
sponsor department agrees.

* goods owned by ALBs receiving less than 50% of their income from the Exchequer
(through grant-in-aid or fees and charges). Commercial insurance protects the risk to
the Exchequer from claims from third parties.

* items used by an ALB for income generation schemes to supplement the approved level
of public spending. Commercial insurance is appropriate to cover the risks lest costs or
losses could not be met out of receipts.

Appraising the options

A4.4.4 Decisions on whether to buy insurance should be based on objective cost-
benefit analysis, using guidance in the Green Book’. Box A4.4C outlines some
factors which are often worth considering in such assessments.

Box A4.4C: Costs and benefits which could be included in assessments

Costs:

+ the insurance premium which may be paid

* the administrative cost of managing claims with the insurance company

Benefits:

* transfer of risk, valued at the expected compensation for the insured losses

+ claims handling, where the insurance company will manage claims against third parties

* the value of guaranteed business recovery: the potential reduction in the time taken to
reinstate losses, reducing business interruption

Setting fees and charges
A4.4.5 If a central government organisation insures risks arising in supplying a
service for which a fee or charge is levied, the actual premium payments should be
included in the calculation of costs when deciding the fee or charge. Similarly,
where a central government organisation self-insures, the notional cost of premium
payments should be taken into account. See Chapter 6 for further details.
1 hitps/www gov.uk/government/publications/the-green-book-appraisal-and-evaluatiorv-in-central-governent

87
