may be particularly appropriate if it is proposed to make the gift urgently or
promptly on expiry of the waiting period.
A4.12.8 Where an objection is raised, the gift should not normally be made until
the objection has been answered. In the case of an Early Day Motion, the MP should
be given an opportunity to make a direct personal representation to the Minister.
The Treasury should be notified of the outcome of any representations made by
MPs.
Noting annual accounts
A4.12.9 Annual accounts should include a note on gifts made by departments if
their total value exceeds £300,000. Gifts with a value of more than £300,000
should be noted individually, with a reference to the appropriate WMS and
departmental minute. Exceptionally, where gifts are made between government
departments, the receiving department should notate its accounts, not the donor.
Gifts received
A4.12.10 Departments should maintain a register detailing gifts they have received,
their estimated value and what happened to them (whether they were retained,
disposed of, etc). Gifts received need not be noted in accounts unless the Treasury
or department concerned considers there is a special need for them to be brought
to parliament's attention.
A4.12.11 Donations, sponsorship or contributions, eg from developers should also
be treated as gifts.
A4.12.12 When offered services on a gratuitous basis, accounting officers should
consider the potential for such services to give rise to future expenditure, as well as
anti- competitiveness risks and propriety issues more broad
A4.12.13 For example, if services may be withdrawn in the future either at the
discretion of the supplier or in the event of the supplier entering insolvency it may
lead to a pressure to continue provide such services on fee paying basis in the
future. It may also be that the provision of services may lead to an incumbency
benefit for the supplier that put them at competitive advantage in any future
procurement.
A4.12.14 The fact there are no upfronts costs to a proposal does not relieve the
Accounting Officer of the need to consider future costs or the need for HMT
consent for novel contentious or repercussive transactions.

118
