Box 7.6: sources of capital for trading funds

* public dividend capital (equivalent to equity, bearing dividends - see annex 7.4)

* reserves built up from trading surpluses

+ long or short term borrowing (either voted from a sponsor department or borrowed

from the National Loans Fund if the trading fund is a department in its own right)

* temporary subsidy from a sponsor department, voted in Estimates

+ finance leases
7.9 Non-ministerial departments
7.9.1 Avery few central government organisations are non-ministerial departments
(NMDs). It is important that there is some clear rationale for this status in each case.
7.9.2 NMDs do not answer directly to any government minister. They have their
own accounting officers, their own Estimates and annual reports, and settle their
budgets directly with the Treasury. However, some ministerial department must
maintain a watching brief over each NMD so that a minister of that department can
answer for the NMD's business in parliament; and if necessary take action to adjust
the legislation under which it operates. A framework document should define such
a relationship.
7.9.3 This limited degree of parliamentary accountability must be carefully justified.
It can be suitable for a public sector organisation with professional duties where
ministerial input would be inappropriate or detrimental to its integrity. But the need
for independence is rarely enough to justify NMD status. It is possible to craft
arrangements for NDPBs which confer robust independence. Where this is possible it
provides better parliamentary accountability, and so is to be preferred.
7.10 Local government
7.10.1 A number of central government departments make significant grants to
local authorities. Some of these are specific (ring fenced). Most are not, allowing
local authorities to set out their own priorities.
7.10.2 Nevertheless parliament expects assurances that such decentralised funds are
used appropriately, ie that they are spent with economy, efficiency and
effectiveness, and not wasted nor misused. The quality of the assurance available
differs from that expected of central government organisations because local
authorities’ prime accountability is to their electorates.
7.10.3 For these relationships a framework document is not usually the most fruitful
approach. Instead. Central government departments should draw up an annual
account of how their accounting officers assure themselves that grants to local
government are distributed and spent appropriately; and how underperformance
can be dealt with. This account forms part of the governance statement in the
report and accounts of each department affected (see annex 3.1).
7.10.4 Similar considerations apply to the NHS and centrally funded schools.

53
