methodology. However, the ultimate judgement in each case lies with the
accounting officer personally.
3.6 Directions
3.6.1. The accounting officer cannot simply accept the minister's aims or policy
without examination. Each departmental accounting officer should take care to
bring to the attention of their minister(s) any conflict between the minister's
instructions and the standards set out in box 3.2.
3.6.2. Where a departmental accounting officer determines that a proposal does
not meet one or more of these standards, the best next step is to consider whether
the policy or proposed course of action can be modified to make it fit. If not, and
the minister decides it is nevertheless appropriate to continue with the proposal, the
accounting officer should ask their senior minister for a formal written direction to
proceed. An oral direction should be confirmed promptly in writing.
3.6.3. Before finalising a direction request, it is good practice for accounting
officers to discuss the matter with the Treasury. Often, by their nature, issues that
might call for a ministerial direction are novel, contentious, or repercussive, and
therefore require explicit Treasury consent. Where this is the case, Treasury consent
should be obtained before the direction request is finalised.
3.6.4. As always, the ultimate judgement in each case must lie with the accounting
officer personally. The acid test is whether the accounting officer could justify the
proposed activity if asked to defend it.
3.6.5. Theres no set form for requesting a direction, though the accounting
officer should be specific about their nature and the standard or standards that
is/are not satisfied.
3.6.6. When a direction is made, the Accounting Officer should:
follow the minster’s direction without further ado
«promptly copy the direction request, the direction and other papers the
accounting officer considers relevant to the Comptroller and Auditor
General and the Treasury Officer of Accounts
e unless it is in the public interest that the matter is kept confidential,
arrange for the direction request and direction itself to be published on
the GOV.UK website promptly, notifying the chairs of the PAC and the
relevant departmental select committee as soon as this occurs
¢ where confidentiality is required, in addition to copying to the
Comptroller and Auditor General and the Treasury Officer of Accounts as
usual, share the direction request and the direction with the chairs of the
PAC and the relevant departmental select committee, along with an
explanation of when they expect the need for confidentiality to fall away
and publication to take place
. if asked, explain the minister's course of action - this respects ministers’
rights to frank advice, while protecting the quality of internal debate.
17
