Annex 4.14
Prompt and efficient complaint handling is an important way of ensuring customers receive the
service to which they are entitled and may save public sector organisations time and money by
preventing a complaint escalating unnecessarily.
If their services have been found deficient, public sector organisations should consider whether to
provide remedies to people or firms who complain. This is separate from administering statutory
rights or other legal obligations, eg to make payments to compensate. Remedies may take several
different forms and should be proportionate and appropriate.
Dealing with complaints
A4.14.1 Public sector organisations should operate clear accessible complaints procedures.
They are a valuable source of feedback which can help shed light on the quality of
service provided, and in particular how well it matches up to policy intentions. So all
complaints should be investigated. The Parliamentary and Health Service
Ombudsman (PHSO) has published Principles of good complaint handling! to help
public bodies when dealing with complaints.Systems for dealing with complaints
should operate promptly and consistently. Those making complaints should be told
how quickly their complaints can be processed. Where groups of complaints raise
common issues, the remedies offered should be fair, consistent and proportionate.
A4.14.3 Public sector organisations should seek to learn from their complaints. If an
internal or external review, or a PHSO investigation, shows there are systemic faults,
defective systems or procedures should be overhauled and corrected.
Remedies
A4.14.4 As section 4.11 explains, when public sector organisations have caused
injustice or hardship because of maladministration or service failure, they should
consider:
«providing remedies so that, as far as reasonably possible, they restore
the wronged party to the position that they would be in had things
been done correctly, and
«whether policies and procedures need change, to prevent the failure
reoccurring.
1 http/Awww.ombudsman.org.uk/mproving-public-service/ombudsmansprinciples/principles-of-good-complaint-handling-full
124
